10.9
Georgia
4.5
15.7
42.9
Kyrgyzstan
0.9
15.5
61.3
Sierra
Leone
40.1
74.4
92.1
Angola
51.8
73.2
89.3
Lithuania
0.7
1.0
3.8
Ukraine
0.0
0.4
4.0
Vietnam
1.9
7.0
23.6
Indonesia
3.6
9.6
53.2
TABLE 10.1 The differences among countries is clear when considering their extreme poverty rates. For the most
part, the selected countries show disparities even within countries from the same regions. All data is from 2018.
(World Bank 2020)
Most of us are accustomed to thinking of global stratification as economic inequality. For example, we can
compare the United States’ average worker’s wage to America’s average wage. Social inequality, however, is just
as harmful as economic discrepancies. Prejudice and discrimination—whether against a certain race,
ethnicity, religion, or the like—can create and aggravate conditions of economic equality, both within and
between nations. Think about the inequity that existed for decades within the nation of South Africa.
Apartheid, one of the most extreme cases of institutionalized and legal racism, created a social inequality that
earned it the world’s condemnation.
Gender inequity is another global concern. Consider the controversy surrounding female genital mutilation.
Nations that practice this female circumcision procedure defend it as a longstanding cultural tradition in
certain tribes and argue that the West shouldn’t interfere. Western nations, however, decry the practice and are
working to stop it.
Inequalities based on sexual orientation and gender identity exist around the globe. According to Amnesty
International, a number of crimes are committed against individuals who do not conform to traditional gender
roles or sexual orientations (however those are culturally defined). From culturally sanctioned rape to state-
sanctioned executions, the abuses are serious. These legalized and culturally accepted forms of prejudice and
discrimination exist everywhere—from the United States to Somalia to Tibet—restricting the freedom of
10 • Global Inequality

individuals and often putting their lives at risk (Amnesty International 2012).
Global Classification
A major concern when discussing global inequality is how to avoid an ethnocentric bias implying that less-
developed nations want to be like those who’ve attained post-industrial global power. Terms such as
developing (nonindustrialized) and developed (industrialized) imply that unindustrialized countries are
somehow inferior, and must improve to participate successfully in the global economy, a label indicating that
all aspects of the economy cross national borders. We must take care how we delineate different countries.
Over time, terminology has shifted to make way for a more inclusive view of the world.
Global classification methods are not only important in understanding economic differences among countries,
but also in providing ways to classify countries and identify trends in other areas. The classifications discussed
below will be used in other chapters, such as the chapter on health and medicine.
Cold War Terminology
Cold War terminology was developed during the Cold War era (1945–1980). Familiar and still used by many, it
classifies countries into first world, second world, and third world nations based on their respective economic
development and standards of living. When this nomenclature was developed, capitalistic democracies such
as the United States and Japan were considered part of the first world. The poorest, most undeveloped
countries were referred to as the third world and included most of sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and
Asia. The second world was the in-between category: nations not as limited in development as the third world,
but not as well off as the first world, having moderate economies and standard of living, such as China or Cuba.
Later, sociologist Manual Castells (1998) added the term fourth world to refer to stigmatized minority groups
that were denied a political voice all over the globe (indigenous minority populations, prisoners, and the
homeless, for example).
Also during the Cold War, global inequality was described in terms of economic development. Along with
developing and developed nations, the terms less-developed nation and underdeveloped nation were used.
This was the era when the idea of noblesse oblige (first-world responsibility) took root, suggesting that the so-
termed developed nations should provide foreign aid to the less-developed and underdeveloped nations in
order to raise their standard of living.
Immanuel Wallerstein: World Systems Approach
Immanuel Wallerstein’s (1979) world systems approach uses an economic basis to understand global
inequality. Wallerstein conceived of the global economy as a complex system that supports an economic
hierarchy that placed some nations in positions of power with numerous resources and other nations in a state
of economic subordination. Those that were in a state of subordination faced significant obstacles to
mobilization.
Core nations are dominant capitalist countries, highly industrialized, technological, and urbanized. For
example, Wallerstein contends that the United States is an economic powerhouse that can support or deny
support to important economic legislation with far-reaching implications, thus exerting control over every
aspect of the global economy and exploiting both semi-peripheral and peripheral nations. We can look at free
trade agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) as an example of how a core
nation is able to leverage its power to gain the most advantageous position in the matter of global trade.
Peripheral nations have very little industrialization; what they do have often represents the outdated castoffs
of core nations or the factories and means of production owned by core nations. They typically have unstable
governments, inadequate social programs, and are economically dependent on core nations for jobs and aid.
There are abundant examples of countries in this category, such as Vietnam and Cuba. We can be sure the
workers in a Cuban cigar factory, for example, which are owned or leased by global core nation companies, are
not enjoying the same privileges and rights as U.S. workers.