9.6   Work in the United States  
The American Dream has always been based on opportunity. Common wisdom states that if you study hard, develop 
good work habits, and graduate high school or, even better, college, then you'll have the opportunity to land a good job. 
That has long been seen as the key to a successful life. And although the reality has always been more complex than 
suggested by the ideal, many Americans remain inspired by this dream – despite extensive evidence of an uneven 
playing field.   
Country  
GDP Per Capita in U.S. Dollars 
Monaco  
185,829.00 
Liechtenstein  
181,402.80 
Bermuda  
117,089.30 
Luxembourg  
114,704.60 
Isle of Man  
89,108.40 
Cayman Islands  
85,975.00 
Macao SAR, China  
84,096.40 
Switzerland  
81,993.70 
Ireland  
78,661.00 
Norway  
75,419.60 
Burundi  
261.2 
Malawi  
411.6 
Sudan  
441.5 
Central African Republic  
467.9 
Mozambique  
503.6 
Afghanistan  
507.1 
Madagascar  
523.4 
Sierra Leone  
527.5 
Niger  
553.9 
Congo, Dem. Rep.  
580.7 
Table 9.3   Gross Domestic Product Per Capita Not every 
country is benefiting from globalization. The GDP per capita of 
the poorest country is 255 times less than that of the 
wealthiest country. (Credit: World Bank)  

 
 
Polarization in the Workforce  
The mix of jobs available in the United States began changing many years before the 2008 recession struck, and, as 
mentioned above, the American Dream has not always been easy to achieve. Geography, race, gender, and other 
factors have always played a role in the number and quality of opportunities one receives. More recently, the increased 
outsourcing—or contracting a job or set of jobs to an outside source—of manufacturing jobs to developing nations has 
greatly diminished the number of high-paying, often unionized, blue-collar positions available. A similar problem has 
arisen in the white-collar sector, with many low-level clerical and support positions also being outsourced to other 
nations. The number of supervisory and managerial positions has been reduced as companies streamline their 
command structures and industries continue to consolidate through mergers. Even highly educated skilled workers such 
as computer programmers have seen their jobs vanish overseas.  
The automation of the workplace, which replaces workers with technology, is another cause of the changes in the job 
market. Computers can be programmed to do many routine tasks faster and less expensively than people who used to 
do such tasks. Jobs like bookkeeping, clerical work, and repetitive tasks on production assembly lines all lend 
themselves to automation. Envision your local supermarket’s self-scan checkout aisles. The automated cashiers affixed 
to the units take the place of paid employees. Now one cashier can oversee transactions at six or more self-scan aisles, 
which was a job that used to require one cashier per aisle.  
Polarization means that a gap has developed in the job market, with most employment opportunities at the lowest and 
highest levels and few jobs for those with mid-level skills and education. At one end, there has been strong demand for 
low-skilled, low-paying jobs in industries like food service and retail. On the other end, some research shows that in 
certain fields there has been a steadily increasing demand for highly skilled and educated professionals, technologists, 
and managers. These high-skilled positions also tend to be highly paid (Autor 2010).  
The fact that some positions are highly paid while others are not is an example of the class system, an economic 
hierarchy in which movement (both upward and downward) between various rungs of the socioeconomic ladder is 
possible. Theoretically, at least, the class system as it is organized in the United States is an example of a meritocracy, 
an economic system that rewards merit––typically in the form of skill and hard work––with upward mobility. A theorist 
working in the functionalist perspective might point out that this system is designed to reward hard work, which 
encourages people to strive for excellence in pursuit of reward. A theorist working in the conflict perspective might 
counter with the thought that hard work does not guarantee success even in a meritocracy, because social capital––the 
accumulation of a network of social relationships and knowledge that will provide a platform from which to achieve 
financial success––in the form of connections or higher education are often required to access the high-paying jobs.   
With so many jobs being outsourced or eliminated by automation, what kind of jobs are there a demand for in the 
United States? While fishing and forestry jobs are in decline, in several markets jobs are increasing. These include 
community and social service, personal care and service, finance, computer and information services, and healthcare. 
The chart below, from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, illustrates areas of projected growth.  
Professions that typically require significant education and training and tend to be lucrative career choices. Jobs that 
require some type of license or formal certification – be it healthcare, technology, or a trade – usually have a higher 
salary than those that do not. Service jobs, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, can include everything from jobs 
with the fire department to jobs scooping ice cream (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2019). There is a wide variety of training 
needed, and therefore an equally large wage potential discrepancy. One of the largest areas of growth by industry, 
rather than by occupational group (as seen above), is in the health field. This growth is across occupations, from 
associate-level nurse’s aides to management-level assisted-living staff. As baby boomers age, they are living longer than 
any generation before, and the growth of this population segment requires an increase in capacity throughout our 
country’s elder care system, from home healthcare nursing to geriatric nutrition.  
Notably, jobs in farming are in decline. This is an area where those with less education traditionally could be assured of 
finding steady, if low-wage, work. With these jobs disappearing, more and more workers will find themselves untrained 
for the types of employment that are available.  

 
 
Another projected trend in employment relates to 
the level of education and training required to gain 
and keep a job. As the chart below shows us, 
growth rates are higher for those with more 
education. Those with a professional degree or a 
master’s degree may expect job growth of 20 and 
22 percent respectively, and jobs that require a 
bachelor’s degree are projected to grow 17 percent. 
At the other end of the spectrum, jobs that require a 
high school diploma or equivalent are projected to 
grow at only 12 percent, while jobs that require less 
than a high school diploma will grow 14 percent. 
Quite simply, without a degree, it will be more 
difficult to find a job. It is worth noting that these 
projections are based on overall growth across all 
occupation categories, so obviously there will be 
variations within different occupational areas. 
However, once again, those who are the least 
educated will be the ones least able to fulfill the 
American Dream. In the past, rising education levels in the United States had been able to keep pace with the rise in the 
number of education-dependent jobs. However, since the late 1970s, men have been enrolling in college at a lower rate 
than women and graduating at a rate of almost 10 percent less.  
As discussed in the chapter introduction, women have been entering the workforce in ever-increasing numbers for 
several decades. They have also been finishing college and going on to earn higher degrees at higher rate than men do. 
This has resulted in many women being better positioned to obtain high-paying, high-skill jobs (Autor 2010).  
Simply put, people will move from where there are few or no jobs to places where there are jobs, unless something 
prevents them from doing so. The process of moving to a country is called immigration. Due to its reputation as the land 
of opportunity, the United States has long been the destination of all skill levels of workers, and immigrants, both 
documented and undocumented, continue to be a major part of the U.S. workforce.  
While the political debate is often fueled by conversations about low-wage-earning immigrants, there are actually as 
many highly skilled––and high-earning––immigrant workers as well. Many immigrants are sponsored by their 
employers who claim they possess talents, education, and training that are in short supply in the U.S. These sponsored 
immigrants account for 15 percent of all legal immigrants (Batalova and Terrazas 2010). However, immigration policies 
shifted significantly, with efforts to 
reduce both legal and 
unauthorized immigration. These 
included stricter enforcement, 
limits on work visas such as H-1B, 
reductions in green cards, and 
curtailing refugee admissions. The 
administration’s policies often 
made legal immigration more 
challenging and increased risks for 
undocumented immigrants in low-
wage jobs, who continued facing 
barriers to upward mobility amid 
heightened deportation efforts. 
These policy changes disrupted 
 
Figure 9.10   Projected Percent Change, by Selected Occupational Groups, 
2019-29 — This chart shows the projected growth of several occupational 
groups. (Credit: Bureau of Labor Statistics)  
 
Figure 9.9   Many college students and others attend job fairs 
looking for their first job or for a better one. (Credit: COD 
Newsroom/flickr)  

 
 
immigration flows and created 
uncertainty for many immigrant 
communities, especially those in 
lower-paying sectors like 
agriculture, service, and 
construction. As of 2025, 
immigration policy under the 
Trump administration remains 
stringent, continuing aggressive 
enforcement and deportation 
efforts while limiting legal 
immigration pathways. This is a 
challenge because immigrants 
carry out essential, difficult and 
low-paid jobs that others often do 
not want to do like agricultural 
jobs, construction, fast food, and 
care work.  
Poverty in the United 
States  
When people lose their jobs during a 
recession or in a changing job market, it 
often takes longer to find a new one, if 
they can find one at all. If they do, it is 
often at a much lower wage or not full 
time. This can force people into poverty. 
In the United States, we tend to have 
what is called relative poverty, defined 
as being unable to live the lifestyle of 
the average person in your country. This 
must be contrasted with the absolute 
poverty that is frequently found in 
underdeveloped countries and defined 
as the inability, or near-inability, to 
afford basic necessities such as food 
(Byrns 2011).  
We cannot even rely on unemployment 
statistics to provide a clear picture of 
total unemployment in the United 
States. First, unemployment statistics do not take into account underemployment, a state in which a person accepts a 
lower paying, lower status job than their education and experience qualifies them to perform. Second, unemployment 
statistics only count those:  
1. who are actively looking for work  
2. who have not earned income from a job in the past four weeks  
3. who are ready, willing, and able to work  
Typical entry-level education  
Employment change,  
2019–29 
Median annual wage, 
Total, all occupations  
3.7% 
$39,810 
Doctoral or professional degree  
5.9% 
$107,660 
Master's degree  
15.0% 
$76,180 
Bachelor's degree  
6.4% 
$75,440 
Associate's degree  
6.2% 
$54,940 
Postsecondary nondegree award  
5.6% 
$39,940 
Some college, no degree  
-0.1% 
$36,790 
High school diploma or equivalent  
1.5% 
$37,930 
No formal educational credential  
3.3% 
$25,700 
 
Table 9.4   More education means more jobs (generally) and a higher amount of 
compensation. (Credit: Bureau of Labor Statistics)  
 
Figure 9.11   Working Poverty vs. Nonworking Poverty Rates, Circa 
2000 — A higher percentage of the people living in poverty in the United 
States have jobs compared to other developed nations.  

 
 
The unemployment statistics provided by the U.S. government are rarely accurate, because many of the unemployed 
become discouraged and stop looking for work. Not only that, but these statistics undercount the youngest and oldest 
workers, the chronically unemployed (e.g., homeless), and seasonal and migrant workers.  
A certain amount of unemployment is a direct result of the relative inflexibility of the labor market, considered structural 
unemployment, which describes when there is a societal level of disjuncture between people seeking jobs and the 
available jobs. This mismatch can be geographic (they are hiring in one area, but most unemployed live somewhere 
else), technological (workers are replaced by machines, as in the auto industry), educational (a lack of specific 
knowledge or skills among the workforce) or can result from any sudden change in the types of jobs people are seeking 
versus the types of companies that are hiring.  
Because of the high standard of living in the United States, many people are working at full-time jobs but are still poor 
by the standards of relative poverty. They are the working poor. The United States has a higher percentage of working 
poor than many other developed countries (Brady, Fullerton and Cross 2010). In terms of employment, the Bureau of 
Labor Statistics defines the working poor as those who have spent at least 27 weeks working or looking for work and 
yet remain below the poverty line. Many of the facts about the working poor are as expected: Those who work only part 
time are more likely to be classified as working poor than those with full-time employment; higher levels of education 
lead to less likelihood of being among the working poor; and those with children under 18 are four times more likely 
than those without children to fall into this category. In 2023, 4.2% of female workers and 3.4% of male workers were 
considered the “working poor” (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2023).  
For context, in Florida, minimum wage is $15.00 (as of 2026), which is roughly the equivalent of $2,426 per month for 
a full-time worker, or about $29,000 per year. However, the average rent price for a one-bedroom apartment in Florida 
is as low as $1,197 in Tallahassee and around $2,730 in Miami. For a single adult without children, it is estimated that 
it costs approximately $50,000 annually to cover basic costs of living. As a result, a single, minimum wage worker 
would need to work two full-time jobs to cover basic expenses.  
Most developed countries protect their 
citizens from absolute poverty by 
providing different levels of social 
services such as unemployment 
insurance, welfare, food assistance, 
and so on. They may also provide job 
training and retraining so that people 
can reenter the job market. In the 
past, the elderly were particularly 
vulnerable to falling into poverty after 
they stopped working; however, 
pensions, retirement plans, and Social 
Security were designed to help 
prevent this. A major concern in the 
United States is the rising number of 
young people growing up in poverty. 
Growing up poor can cut off access to 
the education and services people 
need to move out of poverty and into 
stable employment. As we saw, more 
education was often a key to stability, 
and those raised in poverty are the 
ones least able to find well-paying 
work, perpetuating a cycle.  
 
Figure 9.12   Poverty rates vary by states and region. As you can see, areas 
with the highest level of poverty are relatively tightly clustered, but the 
second-highest rates of poverty occur in states across the nation, from 
Nevada and Arizona in the Southwest to New York in the Northeast. (Credit: 
U.S. Census Bureau)  

 
 
Another notion important to sociologists and citizens is the expense of being poor. In a practical sense, people with 
more money on hand, better credit, a more stable income, and reliable insurance can purchase items or services in 
different ways than people who lack those things. For example, someone with a higher income can pay bills more 
reliably, as well as have more credit extended to them through credit cards or loans. When it comes time for those 
people to purchase a car, for example, they can likely negotiate a lower monthly payment or less money down. In an 
even more simplistic situation, people with more spending money can buy groceries in bulk, spending far less per unit 
than those who must purchase smaller portions. The single greatest expense for most adults is housing; beyond its 
significant portion of a family's expenses, housing drives many other costs, such as transportation (how close does 
someone live to the places they need to go), childcare, and other areas. And people in poverty pay significantly more for 
their housing than others – sometimes 70-80 percent of their total income. Those with fewer resources are also more 
likely to rent rather than own, so they do not build credit in the same way, nor do they have the opportunity to sell the 
property later and utilize their equity (Nobles 2019).  
The ways that governments, organizations, individuals, and society as a whole help the poor are matters of significant 
debate, informed by extensive study. Sociologists and other professionals contribute to these conversations and provide 
evidence of the impacts of these circumstances and interventions to change them. The decisions made on these issues 
have a profound effect on working in the United States.  
Key Terms  
ambilineal: a type of unilateral descent that follows either the father’s or the mother’s side exclusively 
automation: workers being replaced by technology 
bartering: a process where people exchange one form of goods or services for another 
bigamy: the act of entering into marriage while still married to another person 
bilateral descent: the tracing of kinship through both parents’ ancestral lines 
cohabitation: the act of a couple sharing a residence while they are not married 
depression: a sustained recession across several economic sectors 
economy: the social institution through which a society’s resources (goods and services) are managed 
extended family: a household that includes at least one parent and child as well as other relatives like grandparents, 
aunts, uncles, and cousins 
family: socially recognized groups of individuals who may be joined by blood, marriage, or adoption and who form an 
emotional connection and an economic unit of society 
family life course: a sociological model of family that sees the progression of events as fluid rather than as occurring in 
strict stages 
global assembly lines: a practice where products are assembled over the course of several international transactions 
global commodity chains: internationally integrated economic links that connect workers and corporations for the 
purpose of manufacture and marketing 
intimate partner violence (ipv): violence that occurs between individuals who maintain a romantic or sexual relationship 
kinship: a person’s traceable ancestry (by blood, marriage, and/or adoption) 
marriage: a legally recognized contract between two or more people in a sexual relationship who have an expectation of 
permanence about their relationship 

 
 
mechanical solidarity: a form of social cohesion that comes from sharing similar work, education, and religion, as might 
be found in simpler societies 
money: an object that a society agrees to assign a value to so it can be exchanged as payment 
monogamy: the act of being married to only one person at a time 
nuclear family: two parents (traditionally a married husband and wife) and children living in the same household 
organic solidarity: a form of social cohesion that arises out of the mutual interdependence created by the specialization 
of work 
outsourcing: a practice where jobs are contracted to an outside source, often in another country 
polarization: a practice where the differences between low-end and high-end jobs become greater and the number of 
people in the middle levels decreases 
polygamy: the state of being committed or married to more than one person at a time 
recession: two or more consecutive quarters of economic decline 
structural unemployment: a societal level of disjuncture between people seeking jobs and the jobs that are available 
underemployment: a state in which a person accepts a lower paying, lower status job than his or her education and 
experience qualifies him or her to perform 
unilateral descent: the tracing of kinship through one parent only 
xenophobia: an illogical fear and even hatred of foreigners and foreign goods 
 
References