FIGURE 6.1 The national tour of the Tea Party Express visited Minnesota and held a rally outside the state capitol
building. Tarana Burke, who originated the term “me too” in the context of supporting or acknowledging sexual
harassment or assault victims, has spoken frequently on the evolution and issues regarding the MeToo movement.
(Credit: a. Fibonacci Blue/flickr; b Marco Verch)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER OUTLINE
6.1 Types of Groups
6.2 Group Size and Structure
6.3 Formal Organizations
Throughout the history of the United States, individuals have formed groups in order to
achieve goals and bring about change. Some groups are loosely defined, while others have highly organized
structure and mission. And in some cases, groups can have significant influence on culture, society, the
economy, and government.
In 2009, people protesting government spending held a series of “tea parties,” referencing the Boston Tea
Party, an anti-taxation event that led up to the Revolutionary War. Tea Party activists also opposed big
government, high taxes, and political corruption and supported gun rights and traditional family values. They
called for “awareness to any issue which challenges the security, sovereignty, or domestic tranquility of our
beloved nation, the United States of America” (Tea Party, Inc. 2021). The movement grew into a major political
force, with chapters popping up in nearly every community across the country.
By 2010, Tea Party candidates had won seats in the U.S. House of Representatives and the Senate,
demonstrating the political power of the group and its message. As grassroots activism faded, the Tea Party
gained influence within the Republican Party. Many of its ideas have been assimilated into the mainstream
conservative movement and Republican Party platform.
Groups and Organization

In 2016, highly successful Fox News host Gretchen Carlson filed a lawsuit against Fox chairman, Roger Ailes,
for sexual harassment. The suit led other women to come forward with similar allegations against Ailes and
others in the entertainment industry. Soon after, actress Alyssa Milano posted this statement on Twitter: “If all
the women who have been sexually harassed or assaulted wrote 'Me too’ as a status, we might give people a
sense of the magnitude of the problem.” The phrase, “Me Too” had been first used in this context in 2006 by
activist Tarana Burke, in an effort to empower women of color. Within a day of Milano’s post, the “Me Too”
phrase or hashtag was used over 500,000 times on Twitter, and was used in over 12 million posts by 4.7 million
people on Facebook. Thousands of people, including other celebrities, shared their own stories of sexual
harassment, abuse, or assault. (MeTooMvmt.org, 2020) The “MeToo” movement became the lead story on
many newscasts and talk shows. Over the months that followed, the movement sparked reforms within
companies and governments to combat sexual harassment and better support women. The movement
inspired abuse victims to come forward and led to the sanction or removal of prominent individuals accused of
serial harassment or abuse in academia, media, government, and other industries.
The Tea Party evolved into an organization. From a loosely associated set of local chapters, it developed into
several closely affiliated nonprofits (filed with the IRS), a political faction within the Republican Party, and a
caucus within Congress. What about the MeToo movement? Burke started it in 2006 and was working to enact
change long before the hashtag sparked more awareness and new policies. The MeToo has brought together
people to work in groups, but it has yet to form into a permanent MeToo organization.
As enduring social units, groups help foster shared value systems and are key to the structure of society as we
know it. There are three primary sociological perspectives for studying groups: Functionalist, Conflict, and
Interactionist. We can look at the Tea Party and the MeToo movements through the lenses of these methods to
better understand the roles and challenges that they offer.
The Functionalist perspective is a big-picture, macro-level view that looks at how different aspects of society
are intertwined. This perspective is based on the idea that society is a well-balanced system with all parts
necessary to the whole, and it studies the roles these parts play in relation to the whole. A Functionalist might
look at the macro-level needs that each movement serves. For example, a Structural Functionalist might ask
how the Tea Party arose to voice the concerns of a large sector of society that felt politically underrepresented,
or how MeToo drove people to pay attention to sexual harassment and gender inequality. This approach might
look at how each group enabled the voicing of discontent and so stabilized society.
The Conflict perspective is another macroanalytical view, one that focuses on the genesis and growth of
inequality. A conflict theorist studying the Tea Party Movement might look at how it checked interests that
have manipulated the political system over the last 30 years. Or this perspective might explore how MeToo
challenged organizations that have allowed sexual harassment to persist in order to protect those in power.
A third perspective is the Symbolic Interaction or Interactionist perspective. This method of analyzing groups
takes a micro-level view. Instead of studying the big picture, these researchers look at the day-to-day
interactions of groups. Studying these details, the Interactionist looks at issues like leadership style and group
dynamics. In the case of the Tea Party Movement, Interactionists might ask, “How does the Tea Party dynamic
in New York differ from that in Atlanta?” Or, in the case of the MeToo, researchers may seek to learn about who
defines the agenda and approach within the movement.
6.1 Types of Groups
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Differentiate between primary and secondary groups.
•
Recognize in-groups and out-groups as subtypes of primary and secondary groups
•
Define reference groups
Most of us feel comfortable using the word “group” without giving it much thought. Often, we mean different
6 • Groups and Organization

things when using that word. We might say that a group of kids all saw the dog, and it could mean 250 students
in a lecture hall or four siblings playing on a front lawn. In everyday use, it can be a generic term, although it
carries important clinical and scientific meanings. Moreover, the concept of a group is central to much of how
we think about society and human interaction. So how can we hone the meaning more precisely for
sociological purposes?
Defining a Group
The term group is an amorphous one and can refer to a wide variety of gatherings, from just two people (think
about a “group project” in school when you partner with another student), a club, a regular gathering of
friends, or people who work together or share a hobby. In short, the term refers to any collection of at least two
people who interact with some frequency and who share a sense that their identity is somehow aligned with
the group. Of course, every time people are gathered, it is not necessarily a group. A rally is usually a one-time
event, for instance, and belonging to a political party doesn’t imply interaction with others. People who happen
to be in the same place at the same time but who do not interact or share a sense of identity—such as a bunch
of people standing in line at Starbucks—are considered an aggregate, or a crowd.
Another example of a nongroup is people who share similar characteristics but are not tied to one another in
any way. These people are considered a category, and as an example all children born from approximately
1980–2000 are referred to as “Millennials.” Why are Millennials a category and not a group? Because while
some of them may share a sense of identity, they do not, as a whole, interact frequently with each other.
Interestingly, people within an aggregate or category can become a group. During disasters, people in a
neighborhood (an aggregate) who did not know each other might become friendly and depend on each other at
the local shelter. After the disaster when people go back to simply living near each other, the feeling of
cohesiveness may last since they have all shared an experience. They might remain a group, practicing
emergency readiness, coordinating supplies for next time, or taking turns caring for neighbors who need extra
help.
Similarly, there may be many groups within a single category. Consider teachers, for example. Within this
category, groups may exist like teachers’ unions, teachers who coach, or staff members who are involved with
the PTA.
Types of Groups
Sociologist Charles Horton Cooley (1864–1929) suggested that groups can broadly be divided into two
categories: primary groups and secondary groups (Cooley 1909). According to Cooley, primary groups play
the most critical role in our lives. The primary group is usually fairly small and is made up of individuals who
generally engage face-to-face in long-term emotional ways. This group serves emotional needs: expressive
functions rather than pragmatic ones. The primary group is usually made up of significant others, those
individuals who have the most impact on our socialization. The best example of a primary group is the family.
Secondary groups are often larger and impersonal. They may also be task-focused and time-limited. These
groups serve an instrumental function rather than an expressive one, meaning that their role is more goal- or
task-oriented than emotional. A classroom or office can be an example of a secondary group.
Neither primary nor secondary groups are bound by strict definitions or set limits. In fact, people can move
from one group to another. A group of coworkers, for example, can start as a secondary group, but as the
employees work together over the years, they may find common interests and strong ties that transform them
into a primary group. As we will discuss in the chapter on Media and Technology, even online networks of
people with common interests can sometimes move from secondary to primary group status.
6.1 • Types of Groups

Best Friends She’s Never Met
Writer Allison Levy worked alone. While she liked the freedom and flexibility of working from home, she sometimes
missed having a community of coworkers, both for the practical purpose of brainstorming and socializing. Levy did
what many do in the Internet age: she found a group of other writers online through a web forum. Over time, a group
of approximately twenty writers, who all wrote for a similar audience, broke off from the larger group and started a
private invitation-only forum. While writers in general represent all genders, ages, and interests, this group ended up
being a collection of twenty- and thirty-something women who all wrote fiction for children and young adults.
At first, the writers’ forum was clearly a secondary group united by the members’ professions and work situations.
As Levy explained, “On the Internet, you can be present or absent as often as you want. No one is expecting you to
show up.” It was a useful place to research information about publishers, recently-published books and authors,
and industry trends. But as time passed, Levy found it served a different purpose. Since the group shared other
characteristics beyond their writing (such as age and gender), their conversation naturally turned to matters such as
child-rearing, aging parents, health, and exercise. Levy found it was a sympathetic place to talk about any number of
subjects, not just writing. Further, when people didn’t post for several days, others expressed concern, asking
whether anyone had heard from the missing writers. It reached a point where most members would tell the group if
they were traveling or needed to be offline for awhile.
The group continued to share. One member on the site who was going through a difficult family illness wrote, “I
don’t know where I’d be without you women. It is so great to have a place to vent that I know isn’t hurting anyone.”
Others shared similar sentiments.
So is this a primary group? Most of these people have never met each other. They live in Hawaii, Australia,
Minnesota, and across the world. They may never meet. Levy wrote recently to the group, saying, “Most of my ‘real-
life’ friends and even my husband don’t really get the writing thing. I don’t know what I’d do without you.” Despite
the distance and the lack of physical contact, the group clearly fills an expressive need.
FIGURE 6.2 Engineering and construction students gather around a job site. How do your academic interests define
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
6 • Groups and Organization

your in- and out-groups? (Credit: USACEpublicaffairs/flickr)
In-Groups and Out-Groups
One of the ways that groups can be powerful is through inclusion, and its inverse, exclusion. The feeling that
we belong in an elite or select group is a heady one, while the feeling of not being allowed in, or of being in
competition with a group, can be motivating in a different way. Sociologist William Sumner (1840–1910)
developed the concepts of in-group and out-group to explain this phenomenon (Sumner 1906). In short, an
in-group is the group that an individual feels she belongs to, and she believes it to be an integral part of who
she is. An out-group, conversely, is a group someone doesn’t belong to; often we may feel disdain or
competition in relationship to an out-group. Sports teams, unions, and sororities are examples of in-groups
and out-groups. Primary groups consist of both in-groups and out-groups, as do secondary groups.
While group affiliations can be neutral or positive, the concept of in-groups and out-groups can also explain
some negative human behavior, such as white supremacist movements. By defining others as “not like us” and
inferior, in-groups can end up practicing ethnocentrism, racism, sexism, ageism, and heterosexism—manners
of judging others negatively based on their culture, race, sex, age, or sexuality.
Often, in-groups can form within a secondary group. For instance, a workplace can have cliques of people,
from senior executives who play golf together, to engineers who write code together, to young singles who
socialize after hours. While these in-groups might show favoritism and affinity for other in-group members,
the overall organization may be unable or unwilling to acknowledge it. Therefore, it pays to be wary of the
politics of in-groups, since members may exclude others as a form of gaining status within the group.
Bullying and Cyberbullying: How Technology Has Changed the Game
Most of us know that the old rhyme “sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt me” is
inaccurate. Words can hurt, and never is that more apparent than in instances of bullying. Bullying often reaches
extreme levels of cruelty in children and young adults. People at these stages of life are especially vulnerable to
opinions of others and deeply invested in their peer groups. Today, cyberbullying is on the rise. Cyberbullying can
involve sending threatening texts, harassing someone in a public forum (such as Facebook), hacking someone’s
account and pretending to be him or her, posting embarrassing images online, and so on. A study by the
Cyberbullying Research Center found that 28 percent of teens have been a victim of cyberbullying (Hinduja and
Patchin, 2019). Severe bullying can lead students to commit or contemplate suicide. A 2010 study found that 20
percent of middle school students admitted to “seriously thinking about committing suicide” as a result of online
bullying (Hinduja and Patchin 2010). Whereas bullying face-to-face requires willingness to interact with your
victim, cyberbullying allows bullies to harass others from the privacy of their homes without witnessing the
damage firsthand. This form of bullying is particularly dangerous because it’s widely accessible and therefore
easier to carry out.
Cyberbullying first made international headlines in 2010 when a fifteen-year-old girl, Phoebe Prince, in South
Hadley, Massachusetts, committed suicide after being relentlessly bullied by girls at her school. In the aftermath
of her death, the bullies were prosecuted and the state passed anti-bullying legislation. This marked a significant
change in how bullying, including cyberbullying, is viewed in the United States. Now there are numerous
resources for schools, families, and communities to provide education and prevention on this issue. The White
House hosted a Bullying Prevention summit in March 2011, and President and First Lady Obama have used
Facebook and other social media sites to discuss the importance of the issue.
According to a report released in 2013 by the National Center for Educational Statistics, close to 1 in every 3
(27.8 percent) students report being bullied by their school peers. Seventeen percent of students reported being
the victims of cyberbullying.
BIG PICTURE
6.1 • Types of Groups

Will legislation change the behavior of would-be cyberbullies? That remains to be seen. But we can hope
communities will work to protect victims before they feel they must resort to extreme measures.
Reference Groups
FIGURE 6.3 Athletes are often viewed as a reference group for young people. (Credit: nonorganical/ flickr)
A reference group is a group that people compare themselves to—it provides a standard of measurement. In
U.S. society, peer groups are common reference groups. Kids and adults pay attention to what their peers wear,
what music they like, what they do with their free time—and they compare themselves to what they see. Most
people have more than one reference group, so a middle school boy might look not just at his classmates but
also at his older brother’s friends and see a different set of norms. And he might observe the behaviors of his
favorite athletes for yet another point of reference.
Some other examples of reference groups can be one’s cultural center, workplace, family gathering, and even
parents. Often, reference groups convey competing messages. For instance, on television and in movies, young
adults often have wonderful apartments and cars and lively social lives despite not holding a job. In music
videos, young women might dance and sing in a sexually aggressive way that suggests experience beyond their
years. At all ages, we use reference groups to help guide our behavior and establish our social norms. So how
important is it to surround yourself with positive reference groups? You may not recognize a reference group,
but it still influences the way you act. Identifying your reference groups can help you understand the source of
the social identities you aspire to or want to distance yourself from.
6 • Groups and Organization

College: A World of In-Groups, Out-Groups, and Reference Groups
FIGURE 6.4 Which fraternity or sorority would you fit into, if any? Sorority recruitment day offers students an
opportunity to learn about these different groups. (Credit: Texas A&M/flickr)
For a student entering college, the sociological study of groups takes on an immediate and practical meaning. After
all, when we arrive someplace new, most of us glance around to see how well we fit in or stand out in the ways we
want. This is a natural response to a reference group, and on a large campus, there can be many competing groups.
Say you are a strong athlete who wants to play intramural sports, and your favorite musicians are a local punk band.
You may find yourself engaged with two very different reference groups.
These reference groups can also become your in-groups or out-groups. For instance, different groups on campus
might solicit you to join. Are there fraternities and sororities at your school? If so, chances are they will try to
convince students—that is, students they deem worthy—to join them. And if you love playing soccer and want to play
on a campus team, but you’re wearing shredded jeans, combat boots, and a local band T-shirt, you might have a
hard time convincing the soccer team to give you a chance. While most campus groups refrain from insulting
competing groups, there is a definite sense of an in-group versus an out-group. “Them?” a member might say.
“They’re all right, but their parties are nowhere near as cool as ours.” Or, “Only serious engineering geeks join that
group.” This immediate categorization into in-groups and out-groups means that students must choose carefully,
since whatever group they associate with might define their friends for several years to come.
6.2 Group Size and Structure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Explain the ways that size influences group dynamics
•
Differentiate among styles of leadership
•
Interpret the impact of groups on individual behavior
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
6.2 • Group Size and Structure

FIGURE 6.5 Cadets illustrate how strongly conformity can define groups. (Credit: West Point — The U.S. Military
Academy/flickr)
Dyads, Triads, and Large Groups
A small group is typically one where the collection of people is small enough that all members of the group
know each other and share simultaneous interaction, such as a nuclear family, a dyad, or a triad. Georg
Simmel (1858–1915) wrote extensively about the difference between a dyad, or two-member group, and a
triad, which is a three-member group (Simmel 1902). In the former, if one person withdraws, the group can no
longer exist. We can think of a divorce, which effectively ends the “group” of the married couple or of two best
friends never speaking again. In a triad, however, the dynamic is quite different. If one person withdraws, the
group lives on. A triad has a different set of relationships. If there are three in the group, two-against-one
dynamics can develop, and a majority opinion may form on any issue.
Small groups generally have strong internal cohesiveness and a sense of connection. Small groups may face
challenges when trying to achieve large goals. They can struggle to be heard or to be a force for change if they
are pushing against larger groups.
It is difficult to define exactly when a small group becomes a large group. Perhaps it occurs when one group
grows so large that there are too many people to join in a simultaneous discussion. Sometimes it occurs when
a group joins with other groups as part of a movement. These larger groups may share a geographic space,
such as a fraternity or sorority on the same campus, or they might be spread out around the globe. The larger
the group, the more attention it can garner, and the more pressure members can put toward whatever goal
they wish to achieve. At the same time, the larger the group becomes, the more the risk grows for division and
lack of cohesion.
Group Leadership
Often, larger groups require some kind of leadership. In small, primary groups, leadership tends to be
informal. After all, most families don’t take a vote on who will rule the group, nor do most groups of friends.
This is not to say that de facto leaders don’t emerge, but formal leadership is rare. In secondary groups,
leadership is usually more overt. They often outline roles and responsibilities, with a chain of command to
follow. Some secondary groups, like the military, have highly structured and clearly understood chains of
command, and sometimes lives depend on those. After all, how well could soldiers function in a battle if
different people were calling out orders and if they had no idea whom to listen to? Other secondary groups, like
a workplace or a classroom, also have formal leaders, but the styles and functions of leadership can vary
significantly.
6 • Groups and Organization

Leadership function refers to the main goal of the leader, which may be instrumental or expressive. An
instrumental leader is one who is goal-oriented and largely concerned with accomplishing set tasks. We can
imagine that an army general or a Fortune 500 CEO would be an instrumental leader. In contrast, expressive
leaders are more concerned with promoting emotional strength and health, and ensuring that people feel
supported. Social and religious leaders—rabbis, priests, imams, directors of youth homes and social service
programs—are often perceived as expressive leaders. Sometimes people expect men to take on instrumental
roles and women to assume expressive roles. Women and men who exhibit the other-gender manner can be
seen as deviants and can encounter resistance. Yet, both men and women prefer leaders who use a
combination of expressive and instrumental leadership (Boatwright and Forrest, 2000).
Sociologists recognize three leadership styles. Democratic leaders encourage group participation in all
decision making. They work hard to build consensus before choosing a course of action and moving forward.
This type of leader is particularly common, for example, in a club where the members vote on which activities
or projects to pursue. Democratic leaders can be well liked, but there is often a danger that decisions will
proceed slowly since consensus building is time-consuming. A further risk is that group members might pick
sides and entrench themselves into opposing factions rather than reaching a solution.
In contrast, a laissez-faire (French for “leave it alone”) leader is hands-off, allowing group members to self-
manage and make their own decisions. An example of this kind of leader might be an art teacher who opens
the art cupboard, leaves materials on the shelves, and tells students to help themselves and make some art.
While this style can work well with highly motivated and mature participants who have clear goals and
guidelines, it risks group dissolution and a lack of progress.
Finally, authoritarian leaders issue orders and assign tasks with little to no feedback from group members.
These leaders are often instrumental leaders with a strong focus on meeting goals. Often, entrepreneurs fall
into this mold, like Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg. Not surprisingly, authoritarian leaders risk alienating
the workers. When decisions need to made quickly or informed by a high level of expertise, however, this style
of leadership can be required.
In different circumstances, each of these leadership styles can be effective and successful. Consider what
leadership style you prefer. Why? Do you like the same style in different areas of your life, such as a classroom,
a workplace, and a sports team?
6.2 • Group Size and Structure

Women Political Candidates
FIGURE 6.6 Kamala Harris, like many other women leaders, faces unique and sometimes conflicting 
expectations. She may want to lead, but some care more about whether she is liked. (Credit: California National 
Guard/flickr)
Kamala Harris broke a significant barrier when she became the first woman and first person of Black and South 
Asian descent to be elected vice president of the United States. A prominent presidential candidate in her own 
right during the 2020 primary election, Harris was asked by then-candidate Joe Biden to be his running mate in 
order to secure his electoral victory.
You may be surprised, however, to learn that more than ten other women were on the ballot for president or vice 
president on November 3, 2020. Many were not on the ballot in every state, and at least one (Ricki Sue King) 
actually encouraged people not to vote for her. Shirley Chisholm, Lenora Fulani, Jill Stein, Hillary Clinton and 
many other women have been candidates, but the United States has yet to elect a woman to the presidency.
Researchers and political analysts have long established that gender plays a significant role in how political 
leaders (both candidates and elected officials) are perceived. As a starting point, research indicates that, even 
among women, the public prefer masculine qualities in presidents. For example, a study in which subjects 
completed the Bem Sex-Role Inventory and Implicit Leadership Inventory found that the hypothetical “Ideal” 
president possessed more masculine qualities than feminine qualities (Powell and Butterfield 2011).
Beyond the implicit preference toward masculine qualities, women candidates face what is sometimes referred 
to the “likability trap.” Essentially, the public expects and prefers certain qualities from its leaders, and also 
expects and prefers certain qualities based on the candidates’ gender. For women presidential candidates, these 
expectations often conflict. For example, when a male candidate ranks low on feminine qualities, their likeability 
is not significantly affected. But when a female candidate, like Hillary Clinton, ranks low on feminine qualities, 
their likability is significantly impacted. Interestingly, the same survey found that Kamala Harris had a much more 
balanced gender quality rating than Clinton did. The researchers qualified that since Kamala Harris ran for vice 
president, rather than president, the ratings cannot be directly compared to Clinton’s. This difference, though, 
may indicate why many women are elected to legislative and gubernatorial roles, but not to the presidency
BIG PICTURE
6 • Groups and Organization

(Conroy, Martin, and Nadler, 2020).
These same perceptions present themselves in the workplace. Prescriptive stereotypes—that is, ideas about how
men or women should behave—limit women’s advancement to leadership positions. Men are often appreciated
for being ambitious, while women who exhibit assertive behavior are generally perceived as selfish or overly
competitive (Baldoni, 2020). Furthermore, when men help out in the workplace, their contribution is appreciated
while the same task carried out by women goes unacknowledged. Scholars observe that women are
underrepresented in the top levels of U.S. businesses and Fortune 500 companies (Heilman 2012).
FIGURE 6.7 This gag gift demonstrates how female leaders may be viewed if they violate social norms. (Credit:
istolethetv/flickr)
Conformity
We all like to fit in to some degree. Likewise, if we want to stand out, then we want to choose how we stand out
and for what reasons. For example, a person who loves cutting-edge fashion might dress in thought-provoking
new styles to set a new trend.
Conformity is the extent to which an individual complies with group norms or expectations. As you might
recall, we use reference groups to assess and understand how to act, to dress, and to behave. Not surprisingly,
young people are particularly aware of who conforms and who does not. A high school boy whose mother
makes him wear ironed button-down shirts might protest that everyone else wears T-shirts and he will look
stupid. Another high school boy might like wearing those shirts as a way of standing out. How much do you
6.2 • Group Size and Structure

enjoy being noticed? Do you consciously prefer to conform to group norms so as not to be singled out? Are
there people in your class who immediately come to mind when you think about those who don’t want to
conform?
Psychologist Solomon Asch (1907–1996) conducted experiments that illustrated how great the pressure to
conform is, specifically within a small group (1956). Read about his work in the Sociological Research feature
and consider what you would do in Asch’s experiment. Would you speak up? What would help you speak up
and what would discourage it?
Conforming to Expectations
In 1951, psychologist Solomon Asch sat a small group of about eight people around a table. Only one of the
people sitting there was the true subject; the rest were associates of the experimenter. However, the subject was
led to believe that the others were all, like him, people brought in for an experiment in visual judgments. The
group was shown two cards, the first card with a single vertical line, and the second card with three vertical lines
differing in length. The experimenter polled the group and asked each participant one at a time which line on the
second card matched up with the line on the first card.
However, this was not really a test of visual judgment. Rather, it was Asch’s study on the pressures of conformity.
He was curious to see what the effect of multiple wrong answers would be on the subject, who presumably was
able to tell which lines matched. In order to test this, Asch had each planted respondent answer in a specific
way. The subject was seated in such a way that he had to hear almost everyone else’s answers before it was his
turn. Sometimes the nonsubject members would unanimously choose an answer that was clearly wrong.
So what was the conclusion? Asch found that thirty-seven out of fifty test subjects responded with an “obviously
erroneous” answer at least once. When faced by a unanimous wrong answer from the rest of the group, the
subject conformed to a mean of four of the staged answers. Asch revised the study and repeated it, wherein the
subject still heard the staged wrong answers, but was allowed to write down his answer rather than speak it
aloud. In this version, the number of examples of conformity––giving an incorrect answer so as not to contradict
the group––fell by two thirds. He also found that group size had an impact on how much pressure the subject felt
to conform.
The results showed that speaking up when only one other person gave an erroneous answer was far more
common than when five or six people defended the incorrect position. Finally, Asch discovered that people were
far more likely to give the correct answer in the face of near-unanimous consent if they had a single ally. If even
one person in the group also dissented, the subject conformed only a quarter as often. Clearly, it was easier to be
a minority of two than a minority of one.
Asch concluded that there are two main causes for conformity: people want to be liked by the group or they
believe the group is better informed than they are. He found his study results disturbing. To him, they revealed
that intelligent, well-educated people would, with very little coaxing, go along with an untruth. He believed this
result highlighted real problems with the education system and values in our society (Asch 1956).
Stanley Milgram, a Yale psychologist, had similar results in his experiment that is now known simply as the
Milgram Experiment. In 1962, Milgram found that research subjects were overwhelmingly willing to perform acts
that directly conflicted with their consciences when directed by a person of authority. In the experiment, subjects
were willing to administer painful, even supposedly deadly, shocks to others who answered questions incorrectly.
To learn more about similar research, visit http://www.prisonexp.org/
SOCIOLOGICAL RESEARCH
6 • Groups and Organization

The Bystander Effect and Diffusion of Responsibility
Social psychologists have recognized that other people’s presence influences our behavior, whether we are
aware of it or not. One example is the bystander effect, a situation in which people are less likely to interfere
during an emergency or when a social norm is being violated if there are others around. They feel less
responsible because of the presence of other bystanders (Beyer et al., 2017). This is known as diffusion of
responsibility.
Most of the time people report that they don’t want to get involved and that’s why they don’t respond when they
see something wrong. They assume someone else will step up and help. Researchers have found that people
are less likely to help if they don’t know the victim (Cherry 2020).
Think about it this way, you’re walking to class and there are several students around. Someone falls on the
ground having a seizure. What would you do? The bystander effect suggests that unless you know the person
who has fallen, you are more likely to walk away than help. However, social psychologists believe that you are
much more likely to help, or at least stop and check, if you are the only one around.
6.3 Formal Organizations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Distinguish the types of formal organizations
•
Recognize the characteristics of bureaucracies
•
Identify the impact of the McDonaldization of society
A complaint of modern life is that society is dominated by large and impersonal secondary organizations.
From schools to businesses to healthcare to government, these organizations, referred to as formal
organizations, are highly bureaucratized. Indeed, all formal organizations are, or likely will become,
bureaucracies. We will discuss the purpose of formal organizations and the structure of their bureaucracies.
Types of Formal Organizations
FIGURE 6.8 Girl Scout troops and correctional facilities are both formal organizations. (Credit: (a) moonlightbulb/
flickr; (b) CxOxS/flickr)
Sociologist Amitai Etzioni (1975) posited that formal organizations fall into three categories. Normative
organizations, also called voluntary organizations, are based on shared interests. As the name suggests,
joining them is voluntary. People find membership rewarding in an intangible way. They receive non-material
benefits. The Audubon Society and a ski club are examples of normative organizations.
Coercive organizations are groups that we must be coerced, or pushed, to join. These may include prison or a
rehabilitation center. Symbolic interactionist Erving Goffman states that most coercive organizations are total
institutions (1961). A total institution is one in which inmates or military soldiers live a controlled lifestyle and
6.3 • Formal Organizations

in which total resocialization takes place.
The third type is utilitarian organizations, which, as the name suggests, are joined because of the need for a
specific material reward. High school and the workplace fall into this category—one joined in pursuit of a
diploma, the other in order to make money.
Normative or Voluntary
Coercive
Utilitarian
Benefit of Membership
Intangible benefit
Corrective benefit
Tangible benefit
Type of Membership
Volunteer basis
Required
Contractual basis
Feeling of Connectedness
Shared affinity
No affinity
Some affinity
TABLE 6.1 Table of Formal Organizations This table shows Etzioni’s three types of formal
organizations. (Credit: Etzioni 1975)
The Structure of Bureaucracies
Bureaucracies are an ideal type of formal organization. By ideal, sociologists don’t mean “best.” Rather,
bureaucracies have a collection of characteristics that most of them exhibit. Pioneer sociologist Max Weber
characterized a bureaucracy as having a hierarchy of authority, a clear division of labor, explicit rules, and
impersonality (1922). People often complain about bureaucracies––declaring them slow, rule-bound, difficult
to navigate, and unfriendly. Let’s take a look at terms that define a bureaucracy to understand what they mean.
Hierarchy of authority refers to the chain of command that places one individual or office in charge of
another, who in turn must answer to her own superiors. For example, as an employee at Walmart, your shift
manager assigns you tasks. Your shift manager answers to his store manager, who must answer to her regional
manager, and so on, up to the CEO who must answer to the board members, who in turn answer to the
stockholders. Everyone in this bureaucracy follows the chain of command.
Bureaucracies have a clear division of labor: each individual has a specialized task to perform. For example,
at a university, psychology professors teach psychology, but they do not attempt to provide students with
financial aid forms. The Office of Admissions often takes on this task. In this case, it is a clear and
commonsense division. But what about in a restaurant where food is backed up in the kitchen and a hostess is
standing nearby texting on her phone? Her job is to seat customers, not to deliver food. Is this a smart division
of labor?
Bureaucracies have explicit rules, rules that are outlined, written down, and standardized. For example, at
your college or university, the student guidelines are contained within the Student Handbook. As technology
changes and campuses encounter new concerns like cyberbullying, identity theft, and other problems that
arise, organizations scramble to ensure their explicit rules cover these emerging issues.
Finally, bureaucracies are also characterized by impersonality, which takes personal feelings out of
professional situations. This characteristic grew, to some extent, out of a desire to avoid nepotism, backroom
deals, and other types of favoritism, while simultaneously protecting customers and others served by the
organization. Impersonality Bureaucracies can effectively and efficiently serve volumes of customers quickly.
However, explicit rules, clear division of labor, and a strict hierarchy of authority does not allow them to easily
adjust to unique or new situations. As a result, customers frequently complain that stores with bureaucratic
structures, like Walmart, care little about individuals, other businesses, and the community at large.
Bureaucracies are often meritocracies, meaning that hiring and promotion is based on proven and
documented skills, rather than on nepotism or random choice. In order to get into a prestigious college, you
6 • Groups and Organization

need to perform well on the SAT and have an impressive transcript. In order to become a lawyer and represent
clients, you must graduate law school and pass the state bar exam. Of course, there are many well-documented
examples of success by those who did not proceed through traditional meritocracies. Think about technology
companies with founders who dropped out of college, or performers who became famous after a YouTube
video went viral.
In addition, organizations that aspire to become meritocracies encounter challenges. How well do you think
established meritocracies identify talent? Wealthy families hire tutors, interview coaches, test-prep services,
and consultants to help their kids get into the best schools. This starts as early as kindergarten in New York
City, where competition for the most highly-regarded schools is especially fierce. Are these schools, many of
which have copious scholarship funds that are intended to make the school more democratic, really offering
all applicants a fair shake?
There are several positive aspects of bureaucracies. They are intended to improve efficiency, ensure equal
opportunities, and serve a large population. And there are times when rigid hierarchies are needed. But
remember that many of our bureaucracies grew large at the same time that our school model was
developed––during the Industrial Revolution. Young workers were trained, and organizations were built for
mass production, assembly line work, and factory jobs. In these scenarios, a clear chain of command was
critical. Now, in the information age, this kind of rigid training and adherence to protocol can actually decrease
both productivity and efficiency.
Today’s workplace requires a faster pace, more problem solving, and a flexible approach to work. Too much
adherence to explicit rules and a division of labor can leave an organization behind. And unfortunately, once
established, bureaucracies can take on a life of their own. Maybe you have heard the expression “trying to turn
a tanker around mid-ocean,” which refers to the difficulties of changing direction with something large and set
in its ways. State governments and current budget crises are examples of this challenge. It is almost impossible
to make quick changes, leading states to fail, year after year, to address increasingly unbalanced budgets.
Finally, bureaucracies, grew as institutions at a time when privileged white males held all the power. While
ostensibly based on meritocracy, bureaucracies can perpetuate the existing balance of power by only
recognizing the merit in traditionally male and privileged paths.
Michels (1911) suggested that all large organizations are characterized by the Iron Rule of Oligarchy, wherein
an entire organization is ruled by a few elites. Do you think this is true? Can a large organization be
collaborative?
FIGURE 6.9 This McDonald’s storefront in Egypt shows the McDonaldization of society. (Credit: s_w_ellis/flickr)
6.3 • Formal Organizations

The McDonaldization of Society
The McDonaldization of Society (Ritzer 1993) refers to the increasing presence of the fast food business
model in common social institutions, including government, education, and even relationships. The term itself
isn't widely used in publications, research, or common conversation, but its effects are very familiar, even
commonplace. The McDonald's model includes efficiency (the division of labor), predictability, calculability,
and control (monitoring). For example, in your average chain grocery store, people at the register check out
customers while stockers keep the shelves full of goods and deli workers slice meats and cheese to order
(efficiency). Whenever you enter a store within that grocery chain, you receive the same type of goods, see the
same store organization, and find the same brands at the same prices (predictability). You will find that goods
are sold by the pound, so that you can weigh your fruit and vegetable purchase rather than simply guessing at
the price for that bag of onions. The employees use a timecard to calculate their hours and receive overtime
pay (calculability). Finally, you will notice that all store employees are wearing a uniform, and usually a name
tag, so that they can be easily identified. There are security cameras to monitor the store, and some parts of the
store, such as the stockroom, are generally considered off-limits to customers (control). This approach is so
common in chain stores that you might not even notice it; in fact, if you went to a large-chain resturant or a
store like Walmart, seeing a worker or a process that didn’t have these uniform characteristics would seem
odd.
While McDonaldization has resulted in improved profits and an increased availability of various goods and
services to more people worldwide, it has also reduced the variety of goods available in the marketplace while
rendering available products uniform, generic, and bland. Think of the difference between a mass-produced
shoe and one made by a local cobbler, between a chicken from a family-owned farm and a corporate grower, or
between a cup of coffee from the local diner and one from Starbucks. Some more contemporary efforts can be
referred to as “de-McDonaldization”: farmers markets, microbreweries, and various do-it-yourself trends. And
with recent advertising and products emphasizing individuality, even McDonald’s seems to be de-
McDonaldizing itself.
The corporate impact of this phenomenon is interesting on its own, but sociologists and ordinary citizens are
often more concerned about its echoes in other areas of society. A primary example, discussed extensively
later on in this text, is education. Curricula and teaching practices were long the domain of local districts
under state guidance. Some experts felt that this led to both inefficiency and underperformance. Starting in
the 1990s and especially in the early 2000s with the No Child Left Behind law, national standards began to
override local approaches. But the desired outcome (improved education) is difficult to measure and far more
difficult to achieve. Due to funding gaps, difficult standards, and intense public and local government
opposition, the law was largely seen as having limited impact and was eventually phased out.
Healthcare has also gone to a mass production and efficiency model. As you will explore later in the text, U.S.
healthcare providers and insurers faced overwhelming increases in demand, partly the result of America’s
aging and less healthy population. In the 1990s, providers consolidated in what was called hospital “merger
mania.” Local hospitals and even small doctors’ offices were merged or acquired by larger systems (Fuchs
1997). The trend continued with new growth in providers like urgent care offices. Other efficiency and
standardization methods include telemedicine, new types of healthcare professionals, insurance mandates,
and artificial intelligence.
Secrets of the McJob
We often talk about bureaucracies disparagingly, and no organization takes more heat than fast food restaurants.
Several books and movies, such as Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of the All-American Meal by Eric Schossler, paint
an ugly picture of what goes in, what goes on, and what comes out of fast food chains. From their environmental
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
6 • Groups and Organization

impact to their role in the U.S. obesity epidemic, fast food chains are connected to numerous societal ills.
Furthermore, working at a fast food restaurant is often disparaged, and even referred to dismissively, as having a
McJob rather than a real job.
But business school professor Jerry Newman went undercover and worked behind the counter at seven fast food
restaurants to discover what really goes on there. His book, My Secret Life on the McJob, documents his experience.
Unlike Schossler, Newman found that these restaurants offer much good alongside the bad. Specifically, he asserted
that the employees were honest and hardworking, that management was often impressive, and that the jobs
required a lot more skill and effort than most people imagined. In the book, Newman cites a pharmaceutical
executive who says a fast-food service job on an applicant’s résumé is a plus because it indicates the employee is
reliable and can handle pressure.
Businesses like Chipotle, Panera, and Costco attempt to combat many of the effects of McDonaldization. In fact,
Costco is known for paying its employees an average of $20 per hour, or slightly more than $40,000 per year. Nearly
90% of their employees receive health insurance from Costco, a number that is unheard of in the retail sector.
While Chipotle is not known for the high wages of its employees, it is known for attempting to sell high-quality foods
from responsibly sourced providers. This is a different approach from what Schossler describes among burger
chains like McDonalds.
So, what do you think? Are these McJobs and the organizations that offer them still serving an important role in the
economy and people’s careers? Or are they dead-end jobs that typify all that is negative about large bureaucracies?
Have you ever worked in one? Would you?
6.3 • Formal Organizations

Key Terms
aggregate
a collection of people who exist in the same place at the same time, but who don’t interact or
share a sense of identity
authoritarian leader
a leader who issues orders and assigns tasks
bureaucracies
formal organizations characterized by a hierarchy of authority, a clear division of labor,
explicit rules, and impersonality.
category
people who share similar characteristics but who are not connected in any way
clear division of labor
the fact that each individual in a bureaucracy has a specialized task to perform
coercive organizations
organizations that people do not voluntarily join, such as prison or a mental
hospital
conformity
the extent to which an individual complies with group or societal norms
democratic leader
a leader who encourages group participation and consensus-building before moving
into action
dyad
a two-member group
explicit rules
the types of rules in a bureaucracy; rules that are outlined, recorded, and standardized
expressive function
a group function that serves an emotional need
expressive leader
a leader who is concerned with process and with ensuring everyone’s emotional
wellbeing
formal organizations
large, impersonal organizations
group
any collection of at least two people who interact with some frequency and who share some sense of
aligned identity
hierarchy of authority
a clear chain of command found in a bureaucracy
impersonality
the removal of personal feelings from a professional situation
in-group
a group a person belongs to and feels is an integral part of his identity
instrumental function
being oriented toward a task or goal
instrumental leader
a leader who is goal oriented with a primary focus on accomplishing tasks
Iron Rule of Oligarchy
the theory that an organization is ruled by a few elites rather than through
collaboration
laissez-faire leader
a hands-off leader who allows members of the group to make their own decisions
leadership function
the main focus or goal of a leader
leadership style
the style a leader uses to achieve goals or elicit action from group members
McDonaldization of Society
the increasing presence of the fast food business model in common social
institutions
meritocracy
a bureaucracy where membership and advancement is based on merit—proven and
documented skills
normative or voluntary organizations
organizations that people join to pursue shared interests or because
they provide some intangible rewards
out-group
a group that an individual is not a member of, and may even compete with
primary groups
small, informal groups of people who are closest to us
reference groups
groups to which an individual compares herself
secondary groups
larger and more impersonal groups that are task-focused and time limited
total institution
an organization in which participants live a controlled lifestyle and in which total
resocialization occurs
triad
a three-member group
utilitarian organizations
organizations that are joined to fill a specific material need
6 • Key Terms

Section Summary
6.1 Types of Groups
Groups largely define how we think of ourselves. There are two main types of groups: primary and secondary.
As the names suggest, the primary group is the long-term, complex one. People use groups as standards of
comparison to define themselves—both who they are and who they are not. Sometimes groups can be used to
exclude people or as a tool that strengthens prejudice.
6.2 Group Size and Structure
The size and dynamic of a group greatly affects how members act. Primary groups rarely have formal leaders,
although there can be informal leadership. Groups generally are considered large when there are too many
members for a simultaneous discussion. In secondary groups there are two types of leadership functions, with
expressive leaders focused on emotional health and wellness, and instrumental leaders more focused on
results. Further, there are different leadership styles: democratic leaders, authoritarian leaders, and laissez-
faire leaders.
Within a group, conformity is the extent to which people want to go along with the norm. A number of
experiments have illustrated how strong the drive to conform can be. It is worth considering real-life examples
of how conformity and obedience can lead people to ethically and morally suspect acts.
6.3 Formal Organizations
Large organizations fall into three main categories: normative/voluntary, coercive, and utilitarian. We live in a
time of contradiction: while the pace of change and technology are requiring people to be more nimble and
less bureaucratic in their thinking, large bureaucracies like hospitals, schools, and governments are more
hampered than ever by their organizational format. At the same time, the past few decades have seen the
development of a trend to bureaucratize and conventionalize local institutions. Increasingly, Main Streets
across the country resemble each other; instead of a Bob’s Coffee Shop and Jane’s Hair Salon there is a Dunkin
Donuts and a Supercuts. This trend has been referred to as the McDonaldization of society.
Section Quiz
6.1 Types of Groups
1. What does a Functionalist consider when studying a phenomenon like the Tea Party movement?
a.
The minute functions that every person at the protests plays in the whole
b.
The internal conflicts that play out within such a diverse and leaderless group
c.
How the movement contributes to the stability of society by offering the discontented a safe, controlled
outlet for dissension
d.
The factions and divisions that form within the movement
2. What is the largest difference between the Functionalist and Conflict perspectives and the Interactionist
perspective?
a.
The former two consider long-term repercussions of the group or situation, while the latter focuses on
the present.
b.
The first two are the more common sociological perspective, while the latter is a newer sociological
model.
c.
The first two focus on hierarchical roles within an organization, while the last takes a more holistic
view.
d.
The first two perspectives address large-scale issues facing groups, while the last examines more
detailed aspects.
6 • Section Summary

3. What role do secondary groups play in society?
a.
They are transactional, task-based, and short-term, filling practical needs.
b.
They provide a social network that allows people to compare themselves to others.
c.
The members give and receive emotional support.
d.
They allow individuals to challenge their beliefs and prejudices.
4. When a high school student gets teased by her basketball team for receiving an academic award, she is
dealing with competing ______________.
a.
primary groups
b.
out-groups
c.
reference groups
d.
secondary groups
5. Which of the following is not an example of an in-group?
a.
The Ku Klux Klan
b.
A fraternity
c.
A synagogue
d.
A high school
6. What is a group whose values, norms, and beliefs come to serve as a standard for one's own behavior?
a.
Secondary group
b.
Formal organization
c.
Reference group
d.
Primary group
7. A parent who is worrying over her teenager’s dangerous and self-destructive behavior and low self-esteem
may wish to look at her child’s:
a.
reference group
b.
in-group
c.
out-group
d.
All of the above
6.2 Group Size and Structure
8. Two people who have just had a baby have turned from a _______ to a _________.
a.
primary group; secondary group
b.
dyad; triad
c.
couple; family
d.
de facto group; nuclear family
9. Who is more likely to be an expressive leader?
a.
The sales manager of a fast-growing cosmetics company
b.
A high school teacher at a reform school
c.
The director of a summer camp for chronically ill children
d.
A manager at a fast-food restaurant
6 • Section Quiz

10. Which of the following is not an appropriate group for democratic leadership?
a.
A fire station
b.
A college classroom
c.
A high school prom committee
d.
A homeless shelter
11. In Asch’s study on conformity, what contributed to the ability of subjects to resist conforming?
a.
A very small group of witnesses
b.
The presence of an ally
c.
The ability to keep one’s answer private
d.
All of the above
12. Which type of group leadership has a communication pattern that flows from the top down?
a.
Authoritarian
b.
Democratic
c.
Laissez-faire
d.
Expressive
6.3 Formal Organizations
13. Which is not an example of a normative organization?
a.
A book club
b.
A church youth group
c.
A People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) protest group
d.
A study hall
14. Which of these is an example of a total institution?
a.
Jail
b.
High school
c.
Political party
d.
A gym
15. Why do people join utilitarian organizations?
a.
Because they feel an affinity with others there
b.
Because they receive a tangible benefit from joining
c.
Because they have no choice
d.
Because they feel pressured to do so
16. Which of the following is not a characteristic of bureaucracies?
a.
Coercion to join
b.
Hierarchy of authority
c.
Explicit rules
d.
Division of labor
17. What are some of the intended positive aspects of bureaucracies?
a.
Increased productivity
b.
Increased efficiency
c.
Equal treatment for all
d.
All of the above
6 • Section Quiz

18. What is an advantage of the McDonaldization of society?
a.
There is more variety of goods.
b.
There is less theft.
c.
There is more worldwide availability of goods.
d.
There is more opportunity for businesses.
19. What is a disadvantage of the McDonaldization of society?
a.
There is less variety of goods.
b.
There is an increased need for employees with postgraduate degrees.
c.
There is less competition so prices are higher.
d.
There are fewer jobs so unemployment increases.
Short Answer
6.1 Types of Groups
1. How has technology changed your primary groups and secondary groups? Do you have more (and separate)
primary groups due to online connectivity? Do you believe that someone, like Levy, can have a true primary
group made up of people she has never met? Why, or why not?
2. Compare and contrast two different political groups or organizations, such as the MeToo and Tea Party
movements. How do the groups differ in terms of leadership, membership, and activities? How do the
group’s goals influence participants? Are any of them in-groups (and have they created out-groups)?
Explain your answer.
3. The concept of hate crimes has been linked to in-groups and out-groups. Can you think of an example
where people have been excluded or tormented due to this kind of group dynamic?
6.2 Group Size and Structure
4. Think of a scenario where an authoritarian leadership style would be beneficial. Explain. What are the
reasons it would work well? What are the risks?
5. Describe a time you were led by a leader using, in your opinion, a leadership style that didn’t suit the
situation. When and where was it? What could she or he have done better?
6. Imagine you are in Asch’s study. Would you find it difficult to give the correct answer in that scenario? Why
or why not? How would you change the study now to improve it?
7. What kind of leader do you tend to be? Do you embrace different leadership styles and functions as the
situation changes? Give an example of a time you were in a position of leadership and what function and
style you expressed.
6.3 Formal Organizations
8. What do you think about the recent spotlight on fast food restaurants? Do you think they contribute to
society’s ills? Do you believe they provide a needed service? Have you ever worked a job like this? What did
you learn?
9. Do you consider today’s large companies like General Motors, Amazon, or Facebook to be bureaucracies?
Why, or why not? Which of the main characteristics of bureaucracies do you see in them? Which are
absent?
10. Where do you prefer to shop, eat out, or grab a cup of coffee? Large chains like Walmart or smaller
retailers? Starbucks or a local restaurant? What do you base your decisions on? Does this section change
how you think about these choices? Why, or why not?
6 • Short Answer

Further Research
6.1 Types of Groups
For more information about cyberbullying causes and statistics, check out this website on cyberbullying
research (http://openstax.org/l/Cyberbullying) .
6.2 Group Size and Structure
What is your leadership style? This leadership style quiz (http://openstax.org/l/Leadership) helps you find out.
6.3 Formal Organizations
As mentioned above, the concept of McDonaldization is a growing one. Check out this article discussing the
phenomenon of McDonaldization further (http://openstax.org/l/McDonaldization) .
References
Introduction
Cabrel, Javier. 2011. “NOFX - Occupy LA.” LAWeekly.com, November 28. Retrieved February 10, 2012
(http://blogs.laweekly.com/westcoastsound/2011/11/nofx_-_occupy_la_-_11-28-2011.php
(http://blogs.laweekly.com/ westcoastsound/2011/11/nofx_-_occupy_la_-_11-28-2011.php) ).
Tea Party, Inc. 2014. “Tea Party.” Retrieved December 31, 2020 (http://www.teaparty.org).
MeTooMvmt.org, 2021. “History and Inception.” Retrieved December 31, 2020. (https://metoomvmt.org/get-to-
know-us/history-inception/).
6.1 Types of Groups
Cooley, Charles Horton.1963 [1909]. Social Organizations: A Study of the Larger Mind. New York: Shocken.
Cyberbullying Research Center. n.d. Retrieved November 30, 2011 (http://www.cyberbullying.us).
Hinduja, Sameer, and Justin W. Patchin.2010. “Bullying, Cyberbullying, and Suicide.”Archives of Suicide
Research 14(3): 206–221.
Hinduja, Sameer, and Justin W. Patchin.2019. “Summary of Our Cyberbullying Research (2007-2019).”
Cyberbullying Research Center, https://cyberbullying.org/summary-of-our-cyberbullying-research/.
Retrieved February 14, 2021
Khandaroo, Stacy T. 2010. “Phoebe Prince Case a ‘Watershed’ in Fight Against School Bullying.” Christian
Science Monitor, April 1. Retrieved February 10, 2012 (http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Education/2010/
0401/Phoebe-Prince-case-a-watershed-in-fight-against-school-bullying).
Occupy Wall Street. Retrieved November 27, 2011. (http://occupywallst.org/about/).
Schwartz, Mattathias. 2011. “Pre-Occupied: The Origins and Future of Occupy Wall St.” New Yorker Magazine,
November 28.
Sumner, William. 1959 [1906]. Folkways. New York: Dover.
“Times Topics: Occupy Wall Street.” New York Times. 2011. Retrieved February 10, 2012
(http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/organizations/o/occupy_wall_street/
index.html?scp=1-spot&sq=occupy%20wall%20street&st=cse).
We Are the 99 Percent. Retrieved November 28, 2011 (http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/page/2).
6.2 Group Size and Structure
Asch, Solomon. 1956. “Studies of Independence and Conformity: A Minority of One Against a Unanimous
6 • Further Research

Majority.” Psychological Monographs 70(9, Whole No. 416).
Baldoni, John. 2020. "Double-edged workplace ambition: Good for men, bad for women." SmartBrief. August 7,
2020. https://www.smartbrief.com/original/2020/08/double-edged-workplace-ambition-good-men-bad-
women
Boatwright, K.J., and L. Forrest. 2000. “Leadership Preferences: The Influence of Gender and Needs for
Connection on Workers’ Ideal Preferences for Leadership Behaviors.” The Journal of Leadership Studies
7(2): 18–34.
Beyer, F., Sidarus, N., Bonicalzi, S., & Haggard, P. (2017). Beyond self-serving bias: diffusion of responsibility
reduces sense of agency and outcome monitoring. Social cognitive and affective neuroscience, 12(1),
138–145. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsw160
Cherry, K. 2020. “The Diffusion of Responsibility Concept in Psychology.” Very Well Mind. Retrieved October
28, 2020 (https://www.verywellmind.com/what-is-diffusion-of-responsibility-2795095).
Conroy, M,, Martin, D. J., and Nalder. KL. (2020). “Gender, Sex, and the Role of Stereotypes in Evaluations of
Hillary Clinton and the 2016 Presidential Candidates.” Journal of Women, Politics & Policy 41(2): 194-218.
Cox, Ana Marie. 2006. “How Americans View Hillary: Popular but Polarizing.” Time, August 19. Retrieved
February 10, 2012 (http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1229053,00.html).
Dowd, Maureen. 2008. “Can Hillary Cry Her Way to the White House?” New York Times, January 9. Retrieved
February 10, 2012 (http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/09/opinion/08dowd.html?pagewanted=all).
Heilman, Madeline E. 2012. “Gender stereotypes and workplace bias.” Research in Organizational Behavior.
32: 113-135
HeroicImagination TV. (2011, September 28). The Bystander Effect. [Video]. YouTube.
Click to view content (https://www.youtube.com/embed/z4S1LLrSzVE)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z4S1LLrSzVE
Kurtieben, Danielle. 2010. “Sarah Palin, Hillary Clinton, Michelle Obama, and Women in Politics.” US News and
World Report, September 30. Retrieved February 10, 2012 (http://www.usnews.com/opinion/articles/2010/
09/30/sarah-palin-hillary-clinton-michelle-obama-and-women-in-politics).
Milgram, Stanley. 1963. “Behavioral Study of Obedience.” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 67:
371–378.
Simmel, Georg. 1950. The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press.
Weeks, Linton. 2011. “The Feminine Effect on Politics.” National Public Radio (NPR), June 9. Retrieved
February 10, 2012 (http://www.npr.org/2011/06/09/137056376/the-feminine-effect-on-presidential-
politics).
6.3 Formal Organizations
Di Meglio, Francesca. 2007. “Learning on the McJob.” Bloomberg Businessweek, March 22. Retrieved February
10, 2012 (http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2007-03-22/learning-on-the-mcjobbusinessweek-
business-news-stock-market-and-financial-advice).
Etzioni, Amitai. 1975. A Comparative Analysis of Complex Organizations: On Power, Involvement, and Their
Correlates. New York: Free Press.
Fuchs, Victor R.. 1997. “Managed Care and Merger Mania,” JAMA 277.11 (920-921).
Goffman, Erving. 1961. Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates. Chicago,
IL: Aldine.
6 • References

Michels, Robert. 1949 [1911]. Political Parties. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Newman, Jerry. 2007. My Secret Life on the McJob. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Ritzer, George. 1993. The McDonaldization of Society. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge.
Schlosser, Eric. 2001. Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of the All-American Meal. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Company.
United States Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2010–2011
Edition. Retrieved February 10, 2012 (http://www.bls.gov/oco/ocos162.htm).
Weber, Max. 1968 [1922]. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretative Sociology. New York: Bedminster.
6 • References

6 • References