FIGURE 10.1 Contemporary economic development often follows a similar pattern around the world, best
described as a growing gap between the haves and have-nots. (Credit: Alicia Nijdam/Wikimedia Commons)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER OUTLINE
10.1 Global Stratification and Classification
10.2 Global Wealth and Poverty
10.3 Theoretical Perspectives on Global Stratification
The April 24, 2013 collapse of the Rana Plaza in Dhaka, Bangladesh that killed over 1,100
people, was the deadliest garment factory accident in history, and it was preventable (International Labour
Organization, Department of Communication 2014).
In addition to garment factories employing about 5,000 people, the building contained a bank, apartments,
childcare facilities, and a variety of shops. Many of these closed the day before the collapse when cracks were
discovered in the building walls. When some of the garment workers refused to enter the building, they were
threatened with the loss of a month’s pay. Most were young women, aged twenty or younger. They typically
worked over thirteen hours a day, with two days off each month. For this work, they took home between twelve
and twenty-two cents an hour, or $10.56 to $12.48 a week. Without that pay, most would have been unable to
feed their children. In contrast, the U.S. federal minimum wage is $7.25 an hour, and workers receive wages at
time-and-a-half rates for work in excess of forty hours a week.
32 percent of the clothing made in the collapsed Rana Plaza building was intended for U.S., Canadian, and
European stores. Walmart jeans were made on the fifth floor. Clothing for The Children’s Place was produced in
the building, as well. Afterward, Walmart and The Children’s Place pledged $1 million and $450,000
Global Inequality

(respectively) to the Rana Plaza Trust Fund, but fifteen other companies with clothing made in the building
chose not to (Institute for Global Labour and Human Rights 2014).
While you read this chapter, think about the global system that allows U.S. companies to outsource their
manufacturing to peripheral nations, where many women and children work in conditions that some
characterize as slave labor. Do people in the United States have a responsibility to foreign workers? Should U.S.
corporations be held accountable for what happens to garment factory workers who make their clothing? What
can you do as a consumer to help such workers?
10.1 Global Stratification and Classification
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Describe global stratification
•
Differentiate the development history of various classification systems
•
Use terminology from Wallerstein’s world systems approach
•
Explain the World Bank’s classification of economies
Just as the United States' wealth is increasingly concentrated among its richest citizens, global inequality
concentrates resources within certain nations and among certain people.
Measuring the financial resource of the world's richest people is generally easier than measuring the resources
of people living in poverty (Matthews 2019), but researchers and advocates have created some tools to evaluate
and understand economic conditions and outcomes.
One straightforward method is to compare the ratio of income of the richest 10 percent to the income of the
poorest 10 percent. (The same method is sometime used with the richest 20 percent and the poorest 20
percent.) This method does not always provide a full picture of income inequality (it literally leaves out the
middle), but it can certain provide insight.
The Human Development Index expresses the capabilities of people's potential achievement. The index is
calculated using data regarding people's lifespan, education, and income. By using both financial and non-
financial factors, it paints a deeper picture of the lives and issues in a region. For example, a nation with high
income but low education will still have difficulty in overall opportunity. This approach was developed by
Pakistani economist Mahbub ul Haq, who produced the first annual Human Development report, which
captures and illustrates development issues and changes each year.
FIGURE 10.2 The Human Development Index and its derivative, and extensions like the Inequality-adjusted Human
Development Index (IHDI), were developed to center people—not just finances—as the core determinants of a
nation's or region's discussions about economic opportunities, support, and policies. The index considers three
main dimension (categories)—which are health, knowledge, and standard of living (income)—to calculate an
individual value for each dimension, which is then averaged to produce the final value. (Under decent standard of
living, GNI stands for gross national income, and PPP stands for purchasing power parity, both of which are key
indicators of income and relative wealth.) (Credit: United Nations Development Programme)
10 • Global Inequality

Another measure of inequality is Gini Coefficient, named after the Italian sociologist and statistician Corrado
Gini. (Be sure not to confuse this with GNI, which is the gross national income.) It is is calculated using a
number of financial indicators, and is expressed as either a decimal or a percentage. A country in which every
resident has the same income would have a Gini coefficient of 0 (or 0 percent). A country in which one resident
earned all the income, while everyone else earned nothing, would have an income Gini coefficient of 1 (or 100
percent). Thus, the higher the number (the closer to that one person having all the income or wealth), the more
inequality there is.
Other gauges are a bit more direct: To indicate the level of poverty within a nation or region, researchers
calculate the percentage of the population living beneath various poverty thresholds. A common measure is to
consider the percentage of a nation's population living on less than $1.90 per day, which is commonly known
as the International Poverty Line. (Note that United States dollars are often used as a global standard in these
types of measurement.) The table in the next sub-section uses this method.
These are just a few of the ways that sociologists, economists, governments, and others try to understand levels
of income inequality and poverty. Changes in these indicators would alert policymakers that something is
affecting the population. No changes might tell people that, for example, a new financial assistance program
for the poor is not working.
With these analytical elements in mind, let’s consider how the three major sociological perspectives might
contribute to our understanding of global inequality.
The functionalist perspective is a macroanalytical view that focuses on the way that all aspects of society are
integral to the continued health and viability of the whole. A functionalist might focus on why we have global
inequality and what social purposes it serves. This view might assert, for example, that we have global
inequality because some nations are better than others at adapting to new technologies and profiting from a
globalized economy, and that when core nation companies locate in peripheral nations, they expand the local
economy and benefit the workers.
Conflict theory focuses on the creation and reproduction of inequality. A conflict theorist would likely address
the systematic inequality created when core nations exploit the resources of peripheral nations. For example,
how many U.S. companies take advantage of overseas workers who lack the constitutional protection and
guaranteed minimum wages that exist in the United States? Doing so allows them to maximize profits, but at
what cost?
The symbolic interaction perspective studies the day-to-day impact of global inequality, the meanings
individuals attach to global stratification, and the subjective nature of poverty. Someone applying this view to
global inequality would probably focus on understanding the difference between what someone living in a core
nation defines as poverty (relative poverty, defined as being unable to live the lifestyle of the average person in
your country) and what someone living in a peripheral nation defines as poverty (extreme poverty, defined as
being barely able, or unable, to afford basic necessities, such as food).
Global Stratification
While stratification in the United States refers to the unequal distribution of resources among individuals,
global stratification refers to this unequal distribution among nations. There are two dimensions to this
stratification: gaps between nations and gaps within nations. When it comes to global inequality, both
economic inequality and social inequality may concentrate the burden of poverty among certain segments of
the earth’s population (Myrdal 1970).
As mentioned earlier, one way to evaluate stratification is to consider how many people are living in poverty,
and particularly extreme poverty, which is often defined as needing to survive on less than $1.90 per day.
Fortunately, until the COVID-19 pandemic impacted economies in 2020, the extreme poverty rate had been on
a 20-year decline. In 2015, 10.1 percent of the world's population was living in extreme poverty; in 2017, that
10.1 • Global Stratification and Classification

number had dropped an entire percentage point to 9.2 percent. While a positive, that 9.2 percent is equivalent
to 689 million people living on less than $1.90 a day. The same year, 24.1 percent of the world lived on less
than $3.20 per day and 43.6 percent on less than $5.50 per day in 2017 (World Bank 2020). The table below
makes the differences in poverty very clear.
Country
Percentage of people living
on less than $1.90
Percentage of people living
on less than $3.90
Percentage of people living
on less than $5.50
Colombia
4.1
10.9
27.8
Costa Rica
1.4
3.6
10.9
Georgia
4.5
15.7
42.9
Kyrgyzstan
0.9
15.5
61.3
Sierra
Leone
40.1
74.4
92.1
Angola
51.8
73.2
89.3
Lithuania
0.7
1.0
3.8
Ukraine
0.0
0.4
4.0
Vietnam
1.9
7.0
23.6
Indonesia
3.6
9.6
53.2
TABLE 10.1 The differences among countries is clear when considering their extreme poverty rates. For the most
part, the selected countries show disparities even within countries from the same regions. All data is from 2018.
(World Bank 2020)
Most of us are accustomed to thinking of global stratification as economic inequality. For example, we can
compare the United States’ average worker’s wage to America’s average wage. Social inequality, however, is just
as harmful as economic discrepancies. Prejudice and discrimination—whether against a certain race,
ethnicity, religion, or the like—can create and aggravate conditions of economic equality, both within and
between nations. Think about the inequity that existed for decades within the nation of South Africa.
Apartheid, one of the most extreme cases of institutionalized and legal racism, created a social inequality that
earned it the world’s condemnation.
Gender inequity is another global concern. Consider the controversy surrounding female genital mutilation.
Nations that practice this female circumcision procedure defend it as a longstanding cultural tradition in
certain tribes and argue that the West shouldn’t interfere. Western nations, however, decry the practice and are
working to stop it.
Inequalities based on sexual orientation and gender identity exist around the globe. According to Amnesty
International, a number of crimes are committed against individuals who do not conform to traditional gender
roles or sexual orientations (however those are culturally defined). From culturally sanctioned rape to state-
sanctioned executions, the abuses are serious. These legalized and culturally accepted forms of prejudice and
discrimination exist everywhere—from the United States to Somalia to Tibet—restricting the freedom of
10 • Global Inequality

individuals and often putting their lives at risk (Amnesty International 2012).
Global Classification
A major concern when discussing global inequality is how to avoid an ethnocentric bias implying that less-
developed nations want to be like those who’ve attained post-industrial global power. Terms such as
developing (nonindustrialized) and developed (industrialized) imply that unindustrialized countries are
somehow inferior, and must improve to participate successfully in the global economy, a label indicating that
all aspects of the economy cross national borders. We must take care how we delineate different countries.
Over time, terminology has shifted to make way for a more inclusive view of the world.
Global classification methods are not only important in understanding economic differences among countries,
but also in providing ways to classify countries and identify trends in other areas. The classifications discussed
below will be used in other chapters, such as the chapter on health and medicine.
Cold War Terminology
Cold War terminology was developed during the Cold War era (1945–1980). Familiar and still used by many, it
classifies countries into first world, second world, and third world nations based on their respective economic
development and standards of living. When this nomenclature was developed, capitalistic democracies such
as the United States and Japan were considered part of the first world. The poorest, most undeveloped
countries were referred to as the third world and included most of sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America, and
Asia. The second world was the in-between category: nations not as limited in development as the third world,
but not as well off as the first world, having moderate economies and standard of living, such as China or Cuba.
Later, sociologist Manual Castells (1998) added the term fourth world to refer to stigmatized minority groups
that were denied a political voice all over the globe (indigenous minority populations, prisoners, and the
homeless, for example).
Also during the Cold War, global inequality was described in terms of economic development. Along with
developing and developed nations, the terms less-developed nation and underdeveloped nation were used.
This was the era when the idea of noblesse oblige (first-world responsibility) took root, suggesting that the so-
termed developed nations should provide foreign aid to the less-developed and underdeveloped nations in
order to raise their standard of living.
Immanuel Wallerstein: World Systems Approach
Immanuel Wallerstein’s (1979) world systems approach uses an economic basis to understand global
inequality. Wallerstein conceived of the global economy as a complex system that supports an economic
hierarchy that placed some nations in positions of power with numerous resources and other nations in a state
of economic subordination. Those that were in a state of subordination faced significant obstacles to
mobilization.
Core nations are dominant capitalist countries, highly industrialized, technological, and urbanized. For
example, Wallerstein contends that the United States is an economic powerhouse that can support or deny
support to important economic legislation with far-reaching implications, thus exerting control over every
aspect of the global economy and exploiting both semi-peripheral and peripheral nations. We can look at free
trade agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) as an example of how a core
nation is able to leverage its power to gain the most advantageous position in the matter of global trade.
Peripheral nations have very little industrialization; what they do have often represents the outdated castoffs
of core nations or the factories and means of production owned by core nations. They typically have unstable
governments, inadequate social programs, and are economically dependent on core nations for jobs and aid.
There are abundant examples of countries in this category, such as Vietnam and Cuba. We can be sure the
workers in a Cuban cigar factory, for example, which are owned or leased by global core nation companies, are
not enjoying the same privileges and rights as U.S. workers.
10.1 • Global Stratification and Classification

Semi-peripheral nations are in-between nations, not powerful enough to dictate policy but nevertheless
acting as a major source for raw material and an expanding middle-class marketplace for core nations, while
also exploiting peripheral nations. Mexico is an example, providing abundant cheap agricultural labor to the
U.S., and supplying goods to the United States market at a rate dictated by the U.S. without the constitutional
protections offered to United States workers.
World Bank Economic Classification by Income
While the World Bank is often criticized, both for its policies and its method of calculating data, it is still a
common source for global economic data. Along with tracking the economy, the World Bank tracks
demographics and environmental health to provide a complete picture of whether a nation is high income,
middle income, or low income.
FIGURE 10.3 This world map shows advanced, transitioning, less, and least developed countries. Note that the
data in this map is one year older than the data presented in the text below. (Credit: Sbw01f, data obtained from the
CIA World Factbook/Wikimedia Commons)
High-Income Nations
The World Bank defines high-income nations as having a gross national income of at least $12,536 per capita.
in 2019 (World Bank 2021). (Note that the classifications will always lag by a couple of years so that analysts
can evaluate the true income of the nations.) Examples include Belgium, Canada, Japan, Oman, Puerto Rico,
and the United States.
High-income countries face two major issues: capital flight and deindustrialization. Capital flight refers to the
movement (flight) of capital from one nation to another, as when General Motors automotive company closed
U.S. factories in Michigan and opened factories in Mexico.
Deindustrialization, a related issue, occurs as a consequence of capital flight, as no new companies open to
replace jobs lost to foreign nations. As expected, global companies move their industrial processes to the
10 • Global Inequality

places where they can get the most production with the least cost, including the building of infrastructure,
training of workers, shipping of goods, and, of course, paying employee wages. This means that as emerging
economies create their own industrial zones, global companies see the opportunity for existing infrastructure
and much lower costs. Those opportunities lead to businesses closing the factories that provide jobs to the
middle class within core nations and moving their industrial production to peripheral and semi-peripheral
nations.
Capital Flight, Outsourcing, and Jobs in the United States
FIGURE 10.4 Factories and stores in places like the Detroit metro area have been closed and abandoned as
companies go out of business. (Credit: Joe Nuxoll/flickr)
Capital flight describes jobs and infrastructure moving from one nation to another. Look at the U.S. automobile
industry. In the early twentieth century, the cars driven in the United States were made here, employing
thousands of workers in Detroit and in the companies that produced everything that made building cars possible.
However, once the fuel crisis of the 1970s hit and people in the United States increasingly looked to imported
cars with better gas mileage, U.S. auto manufacturing began to decline. During the 2007–2009 recession, the
U.S. government provided emergency funding (usually called a "bail out") for the three main auto companies,
which is evidence of those companies' vulnerability. At the same time, Japanese-owned Toyota and Honda and
South Korean Kia maintained stable sales levels.
Capital flight also occurs when services (as opposed to manufacturing) are relocated. Chances are if you have
called the tech support line for your cell phone or Internet provider, you’ve spoken to someone halfway across
the globe. This professional might tell you her name is Susan or Joan, but her accent makes it clear that her real
name might be Parvati or Indira. It might be the middle of the night in that country, yet these service providers
pick up the line saying, “Good morning,” as though they are in the next town over. They know everything about
your phone or your modem, often using a remote server to log in to your home computer to accomplish what is
BIG PICTURE
10.1 • Global Stratification and Classification

needed. These are the workers of the twenty-first century. They are not on factory floors or in traditional
sweatshops; they are educated, speak at least two languages, and usually have significant technology skills.
They are skilled workers, but they are paid a fraction of what similar workers are paid in the United States. For
U.S. and multinational companies, the equation makes sense. India and other semi-peripheral countries have
emerging infrastructures and education systems to fill their needs, without core nation costs.
As services are relocated, so are jobs. In the United States, unemployment is high. Many college-educated
people are unable to find work, and those with only a high school diploma are in even worse shape. We have, as a
country, outsourced ourselves out of jobs, and not just menial jobs, but white-collar work as well. But before we
complain too bitterly, we must look at the culture of consumerism that we embrace. A flat screen television that
might have cost $1,000 a few years ago is now $250. That cost savings has to come from somewhere. When
consumers seek the lowest possible price, shop at big box stores for the biggest discount they can get, and
generally ignore other factors in exchange for low cost, they are building the market for outsourcing. And as the
demand is built, the market will ensure it is met, even at the expense of the people who wanted it in the first
place.
FIGURE 10.5 Outsourcing was initially a practice for manufacturing and related work. But as more technically
skilled people become more available in other countries, customer service and other services are being moved
out of the United States as well? (Credit: Carlos Ebert/flickr)
Middle-Income Nations
The World Bank divides middle-income economies into two categories. Lower middle income areas are those
with a GNI per capita of more than $1,036 but less than $4,045. Upper middle income areas are those with A
GNI per capita between $4,046 and $12,535. Democratic Republic of Congo, Tunisia, Philippines, El Salvador,
and Nepal are are examples of lower-middle-income countries. And Argentina, Mexico, China, Iran, Turkey,
and Namibia are examples of upper-middle-income nations (World Bank 2021).
Perhaps the most pressing issue for middle-income nations is the problem of debt accumulation. As the name
suggests, debt accumulation is the buildup of external debt, wherein countries borrow money from other
nations to fund their expansion or growth goals. As the uncertainties of the global economy make repaying
10 • Global Inequality

these debts, or even paying the interest on them, more challenging, nations can find themselves in trouble.
Once global markets have reduced the value of a country’s goods, it can be very difficult to ever manage the
debt burden. Such issues have plagued middle-income countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, as well
as East Asian and Pacific nations (Dogruel and Dogruel 2007).
Low-Income Nations
The World Bank defines low-income countries as nations whose per capita GNI was $1,035 per capita or less in
2019. For example, Afghanistan, Ethiopia, and Yemen are considered low-income countries. Low-income
economies are primarily found in Asia and Africa (World Bank 2021), where most of the world’s population
lives. There are two major challenges that these countries face: women are disproportionately affected by
poverty (in a trend toward a global feminization of poverty) and much of the population lives in absolute
poverty.
Nations' classifications often change as their economies evolve and, sometimes, when their political positions
change. Nepal, Indonesia, and Romania all moved up to a higher status based on improved economies. While
Sudan, Algeria, and Sri Lanka moved down a level. A few years ago, Myanmar was a low-income nation, but
now it has moved into the middle-income area. With Myanmar's 2021 coup, the massive citizen response, and
the military's killing of protesters, its economy may go through a downturn again, returning it to the low-
income nation status.
10.2 Global Wealth and Poverty
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Differentiate relative, extreme, and subjective poverty
•
Describe the economic situation of some of the world’s most impoverished areas
•
Explain the cyclical impact of the consequences of poverty
FIGURE 10.6 This young girl was begging for food in the street in Vietnam, holding a younger child as she was doing
so. (Credit: Augapfel/flickr)
What does it mean to be poor? Does it mean being a single mother with two kids in New York City, waiting for
the next paycheck in order to buy groceries? Does it mean living with almost no furniture in your apartment
because your income doesn’t allow for extras like beds or chairs? Or does it mean having to live with the
distended bellies of the chronically malnourished throughout the peripheral nations of Sub-Saharan Africa
and South Asia? Poverty has a thousand faces and a thousand gradations; there is no single definition that
pulls together every part of the spectrum. You might feel you are poor if you can’t afford cable television or buy
your own car. Every time you see a fellow student with a new laptop and smartphone you might feel that you,
10.2 • Global Wealth and Poverty

with your ten-year-old desktop computer, are barely keeping up. However, someone else might look at the
clothes you wear and the calories you consume and consider you rich.
Types of Poverty
Social scientists define global poverty in different ways and take into account the complexities and the issues
of relativism described above. Relative poverty is a state of living where people can afford necessities but are
unable to meet their society’s average standard of living. People often disparage “keeping up with the
Joneses”—the idea that you must keep up with the neighbors’ standard of living to not feel deprived. But it is
true that you might feel ”poor” if you are living without a car to drive to and from work, without any money for
a safety net should a family member fall ill, and without any “extras” beyond just making ends meet.
Contrary to relative poverty, people who live in extreme poverty lack even the basic necessities, which
typically include adequate food, clean water, safe housing, and access to healthcare. Extreme poverty occurs
when someone lives on less than 1.90 U.S dollars per day.
In prior years, the World Bank—the primary organization analyzing these trends––focused heavily on the
number of people under that extreme poverty level of $1.90 per day. (The previous term was "absolute
poverty.") In 2018, the World Bank added two more measures to consider: people living on less than $3.20 and
people living on less than $5.50. As the number of people in that extreme category continues to decline, these
two new categories will be important to recognize the population that lives above the $1.90 line, but still
remains vulnerable to extreme poverty. Someone who begins to earn enough to live on more than $1.90 is still
in severe poverty and should be considered as such (Schoch 2020).
If you were forced to live on $1.90 a day, or even $5.50, how would you do it? What would you deem worthy of
spending money on, and what could you do without? How would you manage the necessities—and how would
you make up the gap between what you need to live and what you can afford?
FIGURE 10.7 Slums in many countries illustrate absolute poverty all too well. (Credit: Ninara/flickr)
Subjective poverty describes poverty that is composed of many dimensions; it is subjectively present when
your actual income does not meet your expectations and perceptions. With the concept of subjective poverty,
10 • Global Inequality

the poor themselves have a greater say in recognizing when it is present. In short, subjective poverty has more
to do with how a person or a family defines themselves. This means that a family subsisting on a few dollars a
day in Nepal might think of themselves as doing well, within their perception of normal. However, a westerner
traveling to Nepal might visit the same family and see extreme need.
The Underground Economy Around the World
What do the driver of an unlicensed hack cab in New York, a piecework seamstress working from her home in
Mumbai, and a street tortilla vendor in Mexico City have in common? They are all members of the underground
economy, a loosely defined unregulated market unhindered by taxes, government permits, or human
protections. Official statistics before the worldwide recession posit that the underground economy accounted for
over 50 percent of nonagricultural work in Latin America; the figure went as high as 80 percent in parts of Asia
and Africa (Chen 2001). A recent article in the Wall Street Journal discusses the challenges, parameters, and
surprising benefits of this informal marketplace. The wages earned in most underground economy jobs,
especially in peripheral nations, are a pittance––a few rupees for a handmade bracelet at a market, or maybe
250 rupees ($5 U.S.) for a day’s worth of fruit and vegetable sales (Barta 2009). But these tiny sums mark the
difference between survival and extinction for the world’s poor.
The underground economy has never been viewed very positively by global economists. After all, its members
don’t pay taxes, don’t take out loans to grow their businesses, and rarely earn enough to put money back into the
economy in the form of consumer spending. But according to the International Labor Organization (an agency of
the United Nations), some 52 million people worldwide will lose their jobs due to the ongoing worldwide
recession. And while those in core nations know that high unemployment rates and limited government safety
nets can be frightening, their situation is nothing compared to the loss of a job for those barely eking out an
existence. Once that job disappears, the chance of staying afloat is very slim.
Within the context of this recession, some see the underground economy as a key player in keeping people alive.
Indeed, an economist at the World Bank credits jobs created by the informal economy as a primary reason why
peripheral nations are not in worse shape during this recession. Women in particular benefit from the informal
sector. The majority of economically active women in peripheral nations are engaged in the informal sector,
which is somewhat buffered from the economic downturn. The flip side, of course, is that it is equally buffered
from the possibility of economic growth.
Even in the United States, the informal economy exists, although not on the same scale as in peripheral and
semi-peripheral nations. It might include under-the-table nannies, gardeners, and housecleaners, as well as
unlicensed street vendors and taxi drivers. There are also those who run informal businesses, like daycares or
salons, from their houses. Analysts estimate that this type of labor may make up 10 percent of the overall U.S.
economy, a number that will likely grow as companies reduce head counts, leaving more workers to seek other
options. In the end, the article suggests that, whether selling medicinal wines in Thailand or woven bracelets in
India, the workers of the underground economy at least have what most people want most of all: a chance to
stay afloat (Barta 2009).
Who Are the Impoverished?
Who are the impoverished? Who is living in absolute poverty? The truth that most of us would guess is that the
richest countries are often those with the least people. Compare the United States, which possesses a relatively
small slice of the population pie and owns by far the largest slice of the wealth pie, with India. These disparities
have the expected consequence. The poorest people in the world are women and those in peripheral and semi-
peripheral nations. For women, the rate of poverty is particularly worsened by the pressure on their time. In
general, time is one of the few luxuries the very poor have, but study after study has shown that women in
BIG PICTURE
10.2 • Global Wealth and Poverty

poverty, who are responsible for all family comforts as well as any earnings they can make, have less of it. The
result is that while men and women may have the same rate of economic poverty, women are suffering more in
terms of overall wellbeing (Buvinic 1997). It is harder for females to get credit to expand businesses, to take the
time to learn a new skill, or to spend extra hours improving their craft so as to be able to earn at a higher rate.
Global Feminization of Poverty
In almost all societies, women have higher rates of poverty than men. More women and girls live in poor
conditions, receive inadequate healthcare, bear the brunt of malnutrition and inadequate drinking water, and
so on. This situation goes back decades, and led University of Michigan sociologist Diana Pearce to coin the
term "feminization of poverty" in 1978. Throughout the 1990s, data indicated that while overall poverty rates
were rising, especially in peripheral nations, the rates of impoverishment increased for women nearly 20
percent more than for men (Mogadham 2005). More recently, as extreme poverty rates continue to fall, women
still make up a disproportionate amount of the world's poor. Gender differences are sometimes difficult to
discern in international poverty data, but researchers have undertaken efforts to define the makeup of those
affected by poverty. Of people aged 25-34, the world has 122 women living in poverty for every 100 men living
in poverty. The world's elderly below the poverty line are also more likely to be women (World Bank 2018).
Why is this happening? While myriad variables affect women's poverty, research specializing in this issue
identifies three causes (Mogadham 2005):
1.
The expansion in the number of female-headed households
2.
The persistence and consequences of intra-household inequalities and biases against women
3.
The implementation of neoliberal economic policies around the world
While women are living longer and healthier lives today compared to ten years ago, around the world many
women are denied basic rights, particularly in the workplace. In peripheral nations, they accumulate fewer
assets, farm less land, make less money, and face restricted civil rights and liberties. Women can stimulate the
economic growth of peripheral nations, but they are often undereducated and lack access to credit needed to
start small businesses. When women are able to attain higher levels of education, they account for significant
economic growth within their nations (OECD 2012).
A wide range of organizations undertake programs or provide support in order to improve opportunity, safety,
education, equality, and financial outcomes for women. Some of these efforts involve diplomacy, such as one
government (or a coalition) working to secure greater rights and improve circumstances of women in other
countries. Key areas of focus are reducing institutional and cultural discrimination, ending domestic violence,
providing women more agency in decision making, and increasing education for children (Scott 2012). Other
programs focus on more immediate needs and opportunities. Microcredit and women's collective savings
accounts are ways to provide financial resources for women and families to make important investments, such
as building a well at their home to improve health and reduce time spent obtaining clean water. Other uses
may involve starting a business, paying a debt, or buying an important appliance or equipment. Unfortunately,
these microfinance programs don't have a track record of alleviating poverty, and in some cases they can lead
to negative outcomes such as trapping women in a cycle of debt, or increasing domestic violence. Collective
savings programs—where local people pool their resources and extend credit within their group—have shown
some more positive outcomes (Aizenman 2016 and Niner 2018). The UN has emphasized that microfinance
and cultural empowerment would both be more successful if they were used in concert with each other (Scott
2012).
Africa
The majority of the poorest countries in the world are in Africa. That is not to say there is not diversity within
the countries of that continent; countries like South Africa and Egypt have much lower rates of poverty than
Angola and Ethiopia, for instance. Overall, African income levels have been dropping relative to the rest of the
world, meaning that Africa as a whole is getting relatively poorer. Making the problem worse, 2014 saw an
10 • Global Inequality

outbreak of the Ebola virus in western Africa, leading to a public health crisis and an economic downturn due
to loss of workers and tourist dollars.
Why is Africa in such dire straits? Much of the continent’s poverty can be traced to the availability of land,
especially arable land (land that can be farmed). Centuries of struggle over land ownership have meant that
much useable land has been ruined or left unfarmed, while many countries with inadequate rainfall have
never set up an infrastructure to irrigate. Many of Africa’s natural resources were long ago taken by colonial
forces, leaving little agricultural and mineral wealth on the continent.
Further, African poverty is worsened by civil wars and inadequate governance that are the result of a continent
re-imagined with artificial colonial borders and leaders. Consider the example of Rwanda. There, two ethnic
groups cohabitated with their own system of hierarchy and management until Belgians took control of the
country in 1915 and rigidly confined members of the population into two unequal ethnic groups. While,
historically, members of the Tutsi group held positions of power, the involvement of Belgians led to the Hutu
seizing power during a 1960s revolt. This ultimately led to a repressive government and genocide against
Tutsis that left hundreds of thousands of Rwandans dead or living in diaspora (U.S. Department of State
2011c). The painful rebirth of a self-ruled Africa has meant many countries bear ongoing scars as they try to
see their way towards the future (World Poverty 2012a). In 2020, armed conflicts were underway in regions of
nations including the Tigray conflict in Ethiopia, the Kamwina Nsapo rebellion in Democratic Republic of
Congo, the Boko Haram insurgency in Nigeria and neighboring countries, and several more. While most of the
ongoing conflicts are considered minor, they are both dangerous and disruptive to the people living in those
regions, and several have included ethnic cleansing, mass kidnapping, extensive sexual violence, and use of
child soldiers.
Asia
FIGURE 10.8 For children who have homes in slums like this one in Phnom Phen, Cambodia, survival and safety are
often the primary and immediate concerns. Longer-term goals, such as education and social mobility, may not be
available options. (Credit: ND Strupler)
While the majority of the world’s poorest countries are in Africa, the majority of the world’s poorest people are
in Asia. As in Africa, Asia finds itself with disparity in the distribution of poverty, with Japan and South Korea
holding much more wealth than India and Cambodia. In fact, most poverty is concentrated in South Asia. One
of the most pressing causes of poverty in Asia is simply the pressure that the size of the population puts on its
resources. Unlike Africa, many people living in poverty reside in urban areas, often in crowded, unhygenic
conditions with limited access to water and resources. Estimates indicate that Asia has 60 percent of the
world's people who live in slums (WorldVision 2019). Those who find work often do so in garment factories or
other manufacturing facilities, where pay is very low and the demands are incredibly high. (See the feature
below on sweatshop labor.) Children are sent to work in these conditions as well.
10.2 • Global Wealth and Poverty

Asia is also frequently impacted by natural disasters. Countries like India, Bangladesh, Vietnam, Thailand, and
the Philippines experience frequent typhoons (hurricanes) and flooding. For those living in insecure
structures —often constructed from various leftover materials and not subject to any type of building
codes—such events can leave entire swaths of the population homeless and vulnerable to disease or injury
(WorldVision 2019).
MENA
The Middle East and North Africa region (MENA) includes oil-rich countries in the Gulf, such as Iran, Iraq, and
Kuwait, but also countries that are relatively resource-poor in relationship to their populations, such as
Morocco and Yemen. These countries are predominately Islamic. For the last quarter-century, economic
growth was slower in MENA than in other developing economies, and almost a quarter of the 300 million
people who make up the population live on less than $2.00 a day (World Bank 2013).
The International Labour Organization tracks the way income inequality influences social unrest. The two
regions with the highest risk of social unrest are Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East-North Africa region
(International Labour Organization 2012). Increasing unemployment and high socioeconomic inequality in
MENA were major factors in the Arab Spring, which—beginning in 2010—toppled dictatorships throughout the
Middle East in favor of democratically elected government. Unemployment and income inequalities are still
being blamed on immigrants, foreign nationals, and ethnic/religious minorities.
Sweatshops and Student Protests: Who’s Making Your Team Spirit?
FIGURE 10.9 These protesters seek to bring attention to the issue of sweatshop labor in producing clothing. (Credit:
Jo Guldi/flickr)
Most of us don’t pay too much attention to where our favorite products are made. And certainly when you’re
shopping for a college sweatshirt or ball cap to wear to a school football game, you probably don’t turn over the
label, check who produced the item, and then research whether or not the company has fair labor practices. But for
the members of USAS—United Students Against Sweatshops—that’s exactly what they do. The organization, which
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
10 • Global Inequality

was founded in 1997, has waged countless battles against both apparel makers and other multinational
corporations that do not meet what USAS considers fair working conditions and wages. USAS also focuses on
ensuring safe and non-exploitative conditions as well as improved pay and benefits for campus workers, including
dining hall staff, security guards, and adjuncts (USAS 2021).
How do clothes get made, and why are garment workers among the most commonly mistreated? In many cases,
large apparel companies—including Nike, Lululemon, H&M, Urban Outfitters (owner of Anthropologie and Free
People), Zara, and most other major brands—outsource their manufacturing to factories around the world. The
apparel companies negotiate prices and schedules with the local manufacturers, and often push for the lowest
possible manufacturing cost and the fastest schedule. In order to keep up with demand and manufacture the
clothing at the required cost, the factories may pay their employees less, force them to work longer hours, and may
maintain unsafe conditions. All of those tactics are associated with sweatshop practices (Chan 2019). In response
to action from organizations like USAS, many apparel companies have undertaken steps to ensure that the factories
they use are treating workers properly, but in reality, it is very difficult to know for sure. Often, the brands work
through subcontractors and subsidiaries, and may not know exactly which factories are producing their products.
Members of USAS helped form the Worker Rights Consortium (WRC), which monitors working conditions for a wide
array of companies and their affiliated factories. WRC conducts regular reviews of worldwide manufacturing
facilities and publishes the results. The WRC also studies and reports on overall economic conditions and their
effect on employment. For example, in 2020, as the global economy went through a rapid downturn, apparel
companies demanded lower prices while they also reduced their orders, which put workers at risk of exploitation or
job loss (Karim 2020).
Consequences of Poverty
FIGURE 10.10 For this child, who is being assessed for malnutrition at a clinic in Kenya, risks associated with
poverty and lack of food were exacerbated by a massive drought that hit the region. (Credit: DFID - UK Department
for International Development/flickr)
Not surprisingly, the consequences of poverty are often also causes. The poor often experience inadequate
healthcare, limited education, and the inaccessibility of birth control. But those born into these conditions are
incredibly challenged in their efforts to break out since these consequences of poverty are also causes of
poverty, perpetuating a cycle of disadvantage.
According to sociologists Neckerman and Torche (2007) in their analysis of global inequality studies, the
10.2 • Global Wealth and Poverty

consequences of poverty are many. Neckerman and Torche have divided them into three areas. The first,
termed “the sedimentation of global inequality,” relates to the fact that once poverty becomes entrenched in an
area, it is typically very difficult to reverse. As mentioned above, poverty exists in a cycle where the
consequences and causes are intertwined. The second consequence of poverty is its effect on physical and
mental health. Poor people face physical health challenges, including malnutrition and high infant mortality
rates. Mental health is also detrimentally affected by the emotional stresses of poverty, with relative
deprivation carrying the most robust effect. Again, as with the ongoing inequality, the effects of poverty on
mental and physical health become more entrenched as time goes on. Neckerman and Torche’s third
consequence of poverty is the prevalence of crime. Cross-nationally, crime rates are higher, particularly for
violent crime, in countries with higher levels of income inequality (Fajnzylber 2002).
Slavery
While most of us are accustomed to thinking of slavery in terms of the antebellum South, modern day slavery
goes hand-in-hand with global inequality. In short, slavery refers to any situation in which people are sold,
treated as property, or forced to work for little or no pay. Just as in the pre-Civil War United States, these
humans are at the mercy of their employers. Chattel slavery, the form of slavery once practiced in the
American South, occurs when one person owns another as property. Child slavery, which may include child
prostitution, is a form of chattel slavery. In debt bondage, or bonded labor, the poor pledge themselves as
servants in exchange for the cost of basic necessities like transportation, room, and board. In this scenario,
people are paid less than they are charged for room and board. When travel is required, they can arrive in debt
for their travel expenses and be unable to work their way free, since their wages do not allow them to ever get
ahead.
The global watchdog group Anti-Slavery International recognizes other forms of slavery: human trafficking (in
which people are moved away from their communities and forced to work against their will), child domestic
work and child labor, and certain forms of servile marriage, in which women are little more than enslaved
people (Anti-Slavery International 2012).
10.3 Theoretical Perspectives on Global Stratification
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Describe the modernization and dependency theory perspectives on global stratification
As with any social issue, global or otherwise, scholars have developed a variety of theories to study global
stratification. The two most widely applied perspectives are modernization theory and dependency theory.
Modernization Theory
According to modernization theory, low-income countries are affected by their lack of industrialization and
can improve their global economic standing through (Armer and Katsillis 2010):
1.
an adjustment of cultural values and attitudes to work
2.
industrialization and other forms of economic growth
Critics point out the inherent ethnocentric bias of this theory. It supposes all countries have the same
resources and are capable of following the same path. In addition, it assumes that the goal of all countries is to
be as “developed” as possible. There is no room within this theory for the possibility that industrialization and
technology are not the best goals.
There is, of course, some basis for this assumption. Data show that core nations tend to have lower maternal
and child mortality rates, longer life spans, and less absolute poverty. It is also true that in the poorest
countries, millions of people die from the lack of clean drinking water and sanitation facilities, which are
benefits most of us take for granted. At the same time, the issue is more complex than the numbers might
suggest. Cultural equality, history, community, and local traditions are all at risk as modernization pushes into
10 • Global Inequality

peripheral countries. The challenge, then, is to allow the benefits of modernization while maintaining a
cultural sensitivity to what already exists.
Dependency Theory
Dependency theory was created in part as a response to the Western-centric mindset of modernization
theory. It states that global inequality is primarily caused by core nations (or high-income nations) exploiting
semi-peripheral and peripheral nations (or middle-income and low-income nations), which creates a cycle of
dependence (Hendricks 2010). As long as peripheral nations are dependent on core nations for economic
stimulus and access to a larger piece of the global economy, they will never achieve stable and consistent
economic growth. Further, the theory states that since core nations, as well as the World Bank, choose which
countries to make loans to, and for what they will loan funds, they are creating highly segmented labor markets
that are built to benefit the dominant market countries.
At first glance, it seems this theory ignores the formerly low-income nations that are now considered middle-
income nations and are on their way to becoming high-income nations and major players in the global
economy, such as China. But some dependency theorists would state that it is in the best interests of core
nations to ensure the long-term usefulness of their peripheral and semi-peripheral partners. Following that
theory, sociologists have found that entities are more likely to outsource a significant portion of a company’s
work if they are the dominant player in the equation; in other words, companies want to see their partner
countries healthy enough to provide work, but not so healthy as to establish a threat (Caniels and Roeleveld
2009).
Factory Girls
We’ve examined functionalist and conflict theorist perspectives on global inequality, as well as modernization
and dependency theories. How might a symbolic interactionist approach this topic?
The book Factory Girls: From Village to City in Changing China, by Leslie T. Chang, provides this opportunity.
Chang follows two young women (Min and Chunming) employed at a handbag plant. They help manufacture
coveted purses and bags for the global market. As part of the growing population of young people who are
leaving behind the homesteads and farms of rural China, these female factory workers are ready to enter the
urban fray and pursue an ambitious income.
Although Chang’s study is based in a town many have never heard of (Dongguan), this city produces one-third of
all shoes on the planet (Nike and Reebok are major manufacturers here) and 30 percent of the world’s computer
disk drives, in addition to an abundance of apparel (Chang 2008).
But Chang’s focus is centered less on this global phenomenon on a large scale, than on how it affects these two
women. As a symbolic interactionist would do, Chang examines the daily lives and interactions of Min and
Chunming—their workplace friendships, family relationships, gadgets and goods—in this evolving global space
where young women can leave tradition behind and fashion their own futures. Their story is one that all people,
not just scholars, can learn from as we contemplate sociological issues like global economies, cultural traditions
and innovations, and opportunities for women in the workforce.
SOCIOLOGICAL RESEARCH
10.3 • Theoretical Perspectives on Global Stratification

Key Terms
capital flight
the movement (flight) of capital from one nation to another, via jobs and resources
chattel slavery
a form of slavery in which one person owns another
core nations
dominant capitalist countries
debt accumulation
the buildup of external debt, wherein countries borrow money from other nations to
fund their expansion or growth goals
debt bondage
the act of people pledging themselves as servants in exchange for money for passage, and are
subsequently paid too little to regain their freedom
deindustrialization
the loss of industrial production, usually to peripheral and semi-peripheral nations
where the costs are lower
dependency theory
a theory which states that global inequity is due to the exploitation of peripheral and
semi-peripheral nations by core nations
extreme poverty
the state where one is barely able, or unable, to afford basic necessities
first world
a term from the Cold War era that is used to describe industrialized capitalist democracies
fourth world
a term that describes stigmatized minority groups who have no voice or representation on the
world stage
GINI coefficient
a measure of income inequality between countries using a 100-point scale, in which 1
represents complete equality and 100 represents the highest possible inequality
global feminization of poverty
a pattern that occurs when women bear a disproportionate percentage of
the burden of poverty
global inequality
the concentration of resources in core nations and in the hands of a wealthy minority
global stratification
the unequal distribution of resources between countries
gross national income (GNI)
the income of a nation calculated based on goods and services produced, plus
income earned by citizens and corporations headquartered in that country
modernization theory
a theory that low-income countries can improve their global economic standing by
industrialization of infrastructure and a shift in cultural attitudes towards work
peripheral nations
nations on the fringes of the global economy, dominated by core nations, with very little
industrialization
relative poverty
the state of poverty where one is unable to live the lifestyle of the average person in the
country
second world
a term from the Cold War era that describes nations with moderate economies and standards
of living
semi-peripheral nations
in-between nations, not powerful enough to dictate policy but acting as a major
source of raw materials and an expanding middle class marketplace
subjective poverty
a state of poverty composed of many dimensions, subjectively present when one’s actual
income does not meet one’s expectations
third world
a term from the Cold War era that refers to poor, unindustrialized countries
underground economy
an unregulated economy of labor and goods that operates outside of governance,
regulatory systems, or human protections
Section Summary
10.1 Global Stratification and Classification
Stratification refers to the gaps in resources both between nations and within nations. While economic
equality is of great concern, so is social equality, like the discrimination stemming from race, ethnicity, gender,
religion, and/or sexual orientation. While global inequality is nothing new, several factors make it more
relevant than ever, like the global marketplace and the pace of information sharing. Researchers try to
understand global inequality by classifying it according to factors such as how industrialized a nation is,
whether a country serves as a means of production or as an owner, and what income a nation produces.
10 • Key Terms

10.2 Global Wealth and Poverty
When looking at the world’s poor, we first have to define the difference between relative poverty, absolute
poverty, and subjective poverty. While those in relative poverty might not have enough to live at their country’s
standard of living, those in absolute poverty do not have, or barely have, basic necessities such as food.
Subjective poverty has more to do with one’s perception of one’s situation. North America and Europe are
home to fewer of the world’s poor than Africa, which has most poor countries, or Asia, which has the most
people living in poverty. Poverty has numerous negative consequences, from increased crime rates to a
detrimental impact on physical and mental health.
10.3 Theoretical Perspectives on Global Stratification
Modernization theory and dependency theory are two of the most common lenses sociologists use when
looking at the issues of global inequality. Modernization theory posits that countries go through evolutionary
stages and that industrialization and improved technology are the keys to forward movement. Dependency
theory, on the other hand, sees modernization theory as Eurocentric and patronizing. With this theory, global
inequality is the result of core nations creating a cycle of dependence by exploiting resources and labor in
peripheral and semi-peripheral countries.
Section Quiz
10.1 Global Stratification and Classification
1. A sociologist who focuses on the way that multinational corporations headquartered in core nations exploit
the local workers in their peripheral nation factories is using a _________ perspective to understand the
global economy.
a.
functional
b.
conflict theory
c.
feminist
d.
symbolic interactionist
2. A ____________ perspective theorist might find it particularly noteworthy that wealthy corporations
improve the quality of life in peripheral nations by providing workers with jobs, pumping money into the
local economy, and improving transportation infrastructure.
a.
functional
b.
conflict
c.
feminist
d.
symbolic interactionist
3. A sociologist working from a symbolic interaction perspective would:
a.
study how inequality is created and reproduced
b.
study how corporations can improve the lives of their low-income workers
c.
try to understand how companies provide an advantage to high-income nations compared to low-
income nations
d.
want to interview women working in factories to understand how they manage the expectations of their
supervisors, make ends meet, and support their households on a day-to-day basis
4. France might be classified as which kind of nation?
a.
Global
b.
Core
c.
Semi-peripheral
d.
Peripheral
10 • Section Quiz

5. In the past, the United States manufactured clothes. Many clothing corporations have shut down their U.S.
factories and relocated to China. This is an example of:
a.
conflict theory
b.
automation
c.
global inequality
d.
capital flight
10.2 Global Wealth and Poverty
6. Slavery in the pre-Civil War U.S. South most closely resembled
a.
chattel slavery
b.
debt bondage
c.
relative poverty
d.
peonage
7. Maya is a twelve-year-old girl living in Thailand. She is homeless, and often does not know where she will
sleep or when she will eat. We might say that Maya lives in _________ poverty.
a.
subjective
b.
absolute
c.
relative
d.
global
8. Mike, a college student, rents a studio apartment. He cannot afford a television and lives on cheap groceries
like dried beans and ramen noodles. Since he does not have a regular job, he does not own a car. Mike is
living in:
a.
global poverty
b.
extreme poverty
c.
subjective poverty
d.
relative poverty
9. Faith has a full-time job and two children. She has enough money for the basics and can pay her rent each
month, but she feels that, with her education and experience, her income should be enough for her family
to live much better than they do. Faith is experiencing:
a.
global poverty
b.
subjective poverty
c.
extreme poverty
d.
relative poverty
10. In a U.S. town, a mining company owns all the stores and most of the houses. It sells goods to the workers
at inflated prices, offers house rentals for twice what a mortgage would be, and makes sure to always pay
the workers less than needed to cover food and rent. Once the workers are in debt, they have no choice but
to continue working for the company, since their skills will not transfer to a new position. This situation
most closely resembles:
a.
child slavery
b.
chattel slavery
c.
debt slavery
d.
servile marriage
10 • Section Quiz

10.3 Theoretical Perspectives on Global Stratification
11. One flaw in dependency theory is the unwillingness to recognize _______.
a.
that previously low-income nations such as China have successfully developed their economies and
can no longer be classified as dependent on core nations
b.
that previously high-income nations such as China have been economically overpowered by low-
income nations entering the global marketplace
c.
that countries such as China are growing more dependent on core nations
d.
that countries such as China do not necessarily want to be more like core nations
12. One flaw in modernization theory is the unwillingness to recognize _________.
a.
that semi-peripheral nations are incapable of industrializing
b.
that peripheral nations prevent semi-peripheral nations from entering the global market
c.
its inherent ethnocentric bias
d.
the importance of semi-peripheral nations industrializing
13. If a sociologist says that nations evolve toward more advanced technology and more complex industry as
their citizens learn cultural values that celebrate hard work and success, she is using _______ theory to
study the global economy.
a.
modernization theory
b.
dependency theory
c.
modern dependency theory
d.
evolutionary dependency theory
14. If a sociologist points out that core nations dominate the global economy, in part by creating global
interest rates and international tariffs that will inevitably favor high-income nations over low-income
nations, he is a:
a.
functionalist
b.
dependency theorist
c.
modernization theorist
d.
symbolic interactionist
15. Dependency theorists explain global inequality and global stratification by focusing on the way that:
a.
core nations and peripheral nations exploit semi-peripheral nations
b.
semi-peripheral nations exploit core nations
c.
peripheral nations exploit core nations
d.
core nations exploit peripheral nations
Short Answer
10.1 Global Stratification and Classification
1. Consider the matter of rock-bottom prices at Walmart. What would a functionalist think of Walmart's model
of squeezing vendors to get the absolute lowest prices so it can pass them along to core nation consumers?
2. Why do you think some scholars find Cold War terminology (“first world” and so on) objectionable?
3. Give an example of the feminization of poverty in core nations. How is it the same or different in peripheral
nations?
4. Pretend you are a sociologist studying global inequality by looking at child labor manufacturing Barbie
dolls in China. What do you focus on? How will you find this information? What theoretical perspective
might you use?
10 • Short Answer

10.2 Global Wealth and Poverty
5. Consider the concept of subjective poverty. Does it make sense that poverty is in the eye of the beholder?
When you see a homeless person, is your reaction different if he or she is seemingly content versus
begging? Why?
6. Think of people among your family, your friends, or your classmates who are relatively unequal in terms of
wealth. What is their relationship like? What factors come into play?
7. Go to your campus bookstore or visit its web site. Find out who manufactures apparel and novelty items
with your school’s insignias. In what countries are these produced? Conduct some research to determine
how well your school adheres to the principles advocated by USAS.
10.3 Theoretical Perspectives on Global Stratification
8. There is much criticism that modernization theory is Eurocentric. Do you think dependency theory is also
biased? Why, or why not?
9. Compare and contrast modernization theory and dependency theory. Which do you think is more useful for
explaining global inequality? Explain, using examples.
Further Research
10.1 Global Stratification and Classification
To learn more about the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, look here (http://openstax.org/l/
UN_development_goals) .
To learn more about the existence and impact of global poverty, peruse the poverty and equity data portal here
(http://openstax.org/l/poverty_data) .
10.2 Global Wealth and Poverty
Students often think that the United States is immune to the atrocity of human trafficking. Check out this
website to learn more about trafficking in the United States (http://openstax.org/l/
human_trafficking_in_US) .
For more information about the ongoing practices of slavery in the modern world take a look at the Anti-
Slavery International website (http://openstax.org/l/anti-slavery) .
10.3 Theoretical Perspectives on Global Stratification
For more information about economic modernization, check out the Hudson Institute (http://openstax.org/l/
Hudson_Institute) .
Learn more about economic dependency at the University of Texas Inequality Project (http://openstax.org/l/
Texas_inequality_project) .
References
Introduction
Butler, Sarah. 2013. “Bangladeshi Factory Deaths Spark Action among High-Street Clothing Chains.” The
Guardian. Retrieved November 7, 2014 (http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/23/rana-plaza-
factory-disaster-bangladesh-primark).
Institute for Global Labour and Human Rights. 2014. "Rana Plaza: A Look Back and Forward." Global Labour
Rights. Retrieved November 7, 2014 (http://www.globallabourrights.org/campaigns/factory-collapse-in-
bangladesh).
10 • Further Research

International Labour Organization, Department of Communication. 2014. "Post Rana Plaza: A Vision for the
Future." Working Conditions: International Labour Organization. Retrieved November 7, 2014
(http://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/who-we-are/ilo-director-general/statements-and-speeches/
WCMS_240382/lang--en/index.htm).
Korzeniewicz, Robert, and Timothy Patrick Moran. 2009. Unveiling Inequality: A World Historical Perspective.
New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
10.1 Global Stratification and Classification
Amnesty International. 2012. “Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity.” Retrieved January 3, 2012
(http://www.amnesty.org/en/sexual-orientation-and-gender-identity).
Castells, Manuel. 1998. End of Millennium. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Central Intelligence Agency. 2012. “The World Factbook.” Retrieved January 5, 2012 (https://www.cia.gov/
library/publications/the-world-factbook/wfbExt/region_noa.html).
Central Intelligence Agency. 2014. “Country Comparison: Infant Mortality Rate.” Retrieved November 7, 2014
(https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-worldfactbook/rankorder/
2091rank.html?countryname=Canada&countrycode=ca&regionCode=noa&rank=182#ca).
Dogruel, Fatma, and A. Suut Dogruel. 2007. “Foreign Debt Dynamics in Middle Income Countries.” Paper
presented January 4, 2007 at Middle East Economic Association Meeting, Allied Social Science Associations,
Chicago, IL.
Moghadam, Valentine M. 2005. “The Feminization of Poverty and Women’s Human Rights.” Gender Equality
and Development Section UNESCO, July. Paris, France.
Myrdal, Gunnar. 1970. The Challenge of World Poverty: A World Anti-Poverty Program in Outline. New York:
Pantheon.
Oxfam. 2014. “Working for the Few: Political Capture and Economic Inequality.” Oxfam.org. Retrieved
November 7, 2014 (http://www.oxfam.org/sites/www.oxfam.org/files/bp-working-for-few-political-capture-
economic-inequality-200114-summ-en.pdf).
United Nations. 2013. "Millennium Development Goals." Retrieved November 7, 2014 (http://www.un.org/
millenniumgoals/bkgd.shtml).
Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1979. The Capitalist World Economy. Cambridge, England: Cambridge World Press.
World Bank. 2014a. “Gender Overview.” Retrieved November 7, 2014 (http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
gender/overview#1).
World Bank. 2014b. “High Income: OECD: Data.” Retrieved November 7, 2014 (http://data.worldbank.org/
income-level/OEC).
World Bank. 2014c. “Low Income: Data.” Retrieved November 7, 2014 (http://data.worldbank.org/income-
level/LIC).
World Bank. 2014d. “Upper Middle Income: Data.” Retrieved November 7, 2014 (http://data.worldbank.org/
income-level/UMC).
World Bank. 2020. "Understanding Poverty: Poverty Overview." Retrieved April 3 2021.
(https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/poverty/overview)
World Bank. 2021. "World Bank Country and Lending Groups." Retrieved April 3 2021.
(https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-
10 • References

groups)
10.2 Global Wealth and Poverty
Aizenman, Nurith. 2016. "You Asked, We Answer: Can Microloans Lift Women Out of Poverty?" NPR. November
1 2016. (https://www.npr.org/sections/goatsandsoda/2016/11/01/500093608/you-asked-we-answer-can-
tiny-loans-lift-women-out-of-poverty)
Anti-Slavery International. 2012. “What Is Modern Slavery?” Retrieved January 1, 2012
(http://www.antislavery.org/english/slavery_today/what_is_modern_slavery.aspx).
Barta, Patrick. 2009. “The Rise of the Underground.” Wall Street Journal, March 14. Retrieved January 1, 2012
(http://online.wsj.com/article/SB123698646833925567.html).
Buvinić, M. 1997. “Women in Poverty: A New Global Underclass.” Foreign Policy, Fall (108):1–7.
Chan, Emily. "Why Do We Still Know So Little About How Our Clothes Are Made?" Vogue. December 18 2019.
(https://www.vogue.co.uk/fashion/article/how-are-our-clothes-actually-made)
Chen, Martha. 2001. “Women in the Informal Sector: A Global Picture, the Global Movement.” The SAIS Review
21:71–82
Chronicle of Higher Education. 2006. “Nearly Nude Penn State Students Protest Sweatshop Labor.” March 26.
Retrieved January 4, 2012 (http://chronicle.com/article/Nearly-Nude-Penn-Staters/36772).
Fajnzylber, Pablo, Daniel Lederman, and Norman Loayza. 2002. “Inequality and Violent Crime.” Journal of Law
and Economics 45:1–40.
International Labour Organization. 2012. “High Unemployment and Growing Inequality Fuel Social Unrest
around the World.” Retrieved November 7, 2014 (http://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/
comment-analysis/WCMS_179430/lang--en/index.htm).
Karim, Naimul. 2020. "Fashion brands accused of exploiting workers at risk of layoffs." Thomson Reuters
Foundation News. October 16 2020. (https://news.trust.org/item/20201015230800-amzjn
Neckerman, Kathryn, and Florencia Torche. 2007. “Inequality: Causes and Consequences.” Annual Review of
Sociology 33:335–357.
Niner, Sara. 2018. "Why microfinance as aid isn't enugh to empower women." The Conversation. May 23, 2018.
(https://theconversation.com/why-microfinance-as-aid-isnt-enough-to-empower-women-96632)
OECD. 2012. "Gender equality in education, employment and entrepreneurship." Meeting of the OECD Council
at Ministerial Level, Paris: 1–252.
Schoch, Marta and Lakner, Christopher and Freije-Rodrigues, Samuel. 2020. " Monitoring poverty at the
US$3.20 and US$5.50 lines: differences and similarities with extreme poverty trends." World Bank Blogs.
November 19 2020. (https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/monitoring-poverty-us320-and-us550-lines-
differences-and-similarities-extreme-poverty)
Scott, Lucy. 2012. "Female Empowerment and Extreme Poverty Reduction." United Nations University. June 6
2012. (https://unu.edu/publications/articles/female-empowerment-and-extreme-poverty-
reduction.html#info)
Shah, Anup. 2011. “Poverty around the World.” Global Issues. Retrieved January 17, 2012
(http://www.globalissues.org/print/article/4).
U.S. Department of State. 2011a. “Background Note: Argentina.” Retrieved January 3, 2012
(http://www.state.gov/r/pa/ei/bgn/26516.htm).
U.S. Department of State. 2011b. “Background Note: China.” Retrieved January 3, 2012 (http://www.state.gov/r/
10 • References

pa/ei/bgn/18902.htm#econ).
U.S. Department of State. 2011c. “Background Note: Rwanda.” Retrieved January 3, 2012 (http://www.state.gov/
r/pa/ei/bgn/2861.htm#econ).
USAS. 2021. “What is USAS.” August. Retrieved April 3, 2021 (http://usas.org/about).
World Bank. 2013. “Middle East and North Africa." Retrieved November 7, 2014 (http://web.worldbank.org/
WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/MENAEXT/
0,,menuPK:247619~pagePK:146748~piPK:146812~theSitePK:256299,00.html).
World Bank. 2014e. “Poverty Overview.” Retrieved November 7, 2014 (http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
poverty/overview).
World Poverty. 2012a. “Poverty in Africa, Famine and Disease.” Retrieved January 2, 2012 (http://world-
poverty.org/povertyinafrica.aspx).
World Poverty. 2012b “Poverty in Asia, Caste and Progress.” Retrieved January 2, 2012 (http://world-
poverty.org/povertyinasia.aspx).
World Poverty. 2012c. “Poverty in Latin America, Foreign Aid Debt Burdens.” Retrieved January 2, 2012
(http://world-poverty.org/povertyinlatinamerica.aspx).
World Bank. 2018 "Gender difference in poverty and household composition through the life- cycle: a global
perspective." Policy research working paper: 8360
10.3 Theoretical Perspectives on Global Stratification
Armer, J. Michael, and John Katsillis. 2010. “Modernization Theory.” Encyclopedia of Sociology, edited by E. F.
Borgatta. Retrieved January 5, 2012 (http://edu.learnsoc.org/Chapters/3%20theories%20of%20sociology/
11%20modernization%20theory.htm).
Caniels, Marjolein, C.J. Roeleveld, and Adriaan Roeleveld. 2009. “Power and Dependence Perspectives on
Outsourcing Decisions.” European Management Journal 27:402–417. Retrieved January 4, 2012 (http://ou-
nl.academia.edu/MarjoleinCaniels/Papers/645947/
Power_and_dependence_perspectives_on_outsourcing_decisions).
Chang, Leslie T. 2008. Factory Girls: From Village to City in Changing China. New York: Random House.
Hendricks, John. 2010. “Dependency Theory.” Encyclopedia of Sociology, edited by E.F. Borgatta. Retrieved
January 5, 2012 (http://edu.learnsoc.org/Chapters/3%20theories%20of%20sociology/
5%20dependency%20theory.htm).
10 • References

10 • References