FIGURE 13.1 Older people, especially family members, can foster a connection between our past and present and
help build our memories and identities. But they sometimes need unexpected help, which they do not always
accept. (Credit: PWRDF/flickr)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER OUTLINE
13.1 Who Are the Elderly? Aging in Society
13.2 The Process of Aging
13.3 Challenges Facing the Elderly
13.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Aging
9-year old twins Osiris and Joli loved making meals with Bibi, their grandmother. Osiris
loved the cooking; Joli loved stealing the ingredients. The kids didn't get very involved with the chicken, but
perked up with the fufu and almost took over the dough balls. Bibi yelled at Joli to stop eating raw batter, but
she didn't mean it.
Bibi loved having them around. She sang mash-ups of 90s songs and big band music, mixing in funny
mentions of their day-to-day lives. As she prepped the cassava, she'd throw the discarded pieces in a waste
bowl like she was playing basketball. Bibi told them a story about how one of her schoolteachers was was so
young that all the students thought she was one of them. “So when she told us her last name, I thought it was
her first name and called her by it. So she sent me outside for punishment!”
The kids burst into peals of laughter. Bibi joined in as she moved a pan.
Aging and the Elderly

Suddenly the stove erupted in flame. The oil in the pan had spilled over. Bibi grabbed a glass of water on the
table. Joli screamed at her to stop, but Bibi had already thrown the water onto the oil. The flames flared and
splattered across the stove and onto the counter. A paper towel caught fire. Everyone was screaming. Osiris
and Joli's mother, Gloria, was in the room a moment later. Pushing Bibi away, she turned off the stove and
threw a towel on some of the flames. She took a fire extinguisher from the cabinet and, after a few seconds of
fiddling with the pin and hose, emptied it onto the fire.
“Mom!” Gloria yelled. “Why would you put water on an oil fire? You know that's the last thing to do!”
Bibi, in the corner, seemed to hold on to the wall to remain standing. She shook her head and looked at the
children. “It's a fire. You put water on it.”
“No you don't. You taught me never to do that. You told me to use salt...anything but water. You could have
burned down the house!”
Bibi was crying. She looked at the children and sank toward the floor. “I don't remember that. I'm so sorry. It's
a fire, I thought. Put water on it.” Gloria sent the children out of the room and sat her mother down.
Aside from the scare from the fire, why might Bibi be crying? What difficulties do older people face in
undertaking day-to-day activities? What difficulties do their family members face? In this chapter, we will
explore the identities and issues of older people in our societies, and consider our attitudes and obligations
toward them.
13.1 Who Are the Elderly? Aging in Society
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Differentiate between the major senior age groups (young-old, middle-old, and old-old)
•
Describe the “graying of the United States” as the population experiences increased life expectancies
•
Examine aging as a global issue
FIGURE 13.2 Elderly people may not always conform to society's expectations of their attitudes or their abilities.
While we don't know whether or not these marathon participants are running competitively, it's clear the older
person in the foreground is ahead of many younger people. (Credit: Mike Kaden/flickr)
Think of U.S. movies and television shows you have watched recently. Did any of them feature older actors and
actresses? What roles did they play? How were these older actors portrayed? Were they cast as main characters
in a love story? Did they seem fully capable, safe, productive, and happy? Or were they a challenge to those
13 • Aging and the Elderly

around them? Were they grouchy or overly set in their ways?
Many media portrayals of the elderly reflect negative cultural attitudes toward aging. In the United States,
society tends to glorify youth and associate it with beauty and sexuality. In comedies, the elderly are often
associated with grumpiness or hostility. Rarely do the roles of older people convey the fullness of life
experienced by seniors—as employees, lovers, or the myriad roles they have in real life. What values does this
reflect?
One hindrance to society’s fuller understanding of aging is that people rarely understand the process of aging
until they reach old age themselves. This lack of understanding is in stark contrast to our perspective on
childhood, something we've all experienced. And as is often the case with a lack of knowledge or
understanding, it leads to myths, assumptions, and stereotypes about elderly people and the aging process.
While stereotypes associated with race and gender may lead to more critical thought and sensitivity, many
people accept age stereotypes without question (Levy 2002). Consider this: At your school or workplace, you
have likely had the opportunity (or may be required) to attend workshops on racial equity, cultural sensitivity,
sexual harassment, and so on. But even though the elderly are all around us (and increasing in number every
day), very few institutions conduct similar workshops or forums about the elderly. Each culture has a certain
set of expectations and assumptions about aging, all of which are part of our socialization.
While the landmarks of maturing into adulthood are a source of pride, often celebrated at major milestones
like First Communion, Bar Mitzvah, or Quinceañera, signs of natural aging can be cause for shame or
embarrassment. Some people avoid acknowledging their aging by rejecting help when they need it , which can
lead to physical injury or problems obtaining needed items or information. For example, when vaccinations
for the COVID-19 virus became available, U.S. seniors who didn't have help from family and friends lagged
significantly in receiving vaccines; this occurred despite of the fact that seniors were known to be the highest
risk group and were the most susceptible to illness and death if they were infected (Graham 2021). Those
elderly people who were resistant to reach out for help may have waited too long, and their neighbors or other
community members may not have known they needed the help. Why would they take this risk? Researchers
aim to uncover the motivations and challenges that may result in these circumstances and behavior.
Gerontology is a field of science that seeks to understand the process of aging and the challenges encountered
as seniors grow older. Gerontologists investigate age, aging, and the aged. Gerontologists study what it is like to
be an older adult in a society and the ways that aging affects members of a society. As a multidisciplinary field,
gerontology includes the work of medical and biological scientists, social scientists, and even financial and
economic scholars.
Social gerontology refers to a specialized field of gerontology that examines the social (and sociological)
aspects of aging. Researchers focus on developing a broad understanding of the experiences of people at
specific ages, such as mental and physical wellbeing, plus age-specific concerns such as the process of dying.
Social gerontologists work as social researchers, counselors, community organizers, and service providers for
older adults. Because of their specialization, social gerontologists are in a strong position to advocate for older
adults.
Scholars in these disciplines have learned that “aging” reflects not only the physiological process of growing
older but also our attitudes and beliefs about the aging process. You’ve likely seen online calculators that
promise to determine your “real age” as opposed to your chronological age. These ads target the notion that
people may “feel” a different age than their actual years. Some sixty-year-olds feel frail and elderly, while some
eighty-year-olds feel sprightly.
Equally revealing is that as people grow older they define “old age” in terms of greater years than their current
age (Logan 1992). Many people want to postpone old age and regard it as a phase that will never arrive. For
example, many older Americans keep working well past what people consider retirement age, due to financial
pressures or in order to remain, in their eyes, useful. Some older adults even succumb to stereotyping their
13.1 • Who Are the Elderly? Aging in Society

own age group (Rothbaum 1983).
In the United States, the experience of being elderly has changed greatly over the past century. In the late
1800s and early 1900s, many U.S. households were home to multigenerational families, and the experiences
and wisdom of elders was respected. They offered wisdom and support to their children and often helped raise
their grandchildren (Sweetser 1984).
Multigenerational U.S. families began to decline after World War II, and their numbers reached a low point
around 1980, but they are consistently on the rise. A 2010 Pew Research Center analysis of census data found
that 49 million people in the United States lived in a family household with at least two adult generations—or a
grandparent and at least one other generation a record at the time. By 2016, that number had grown to 64
million people living in multigenerational households, roughly 20 percent of the population (Cohn 2018).
Attitudes toward the elderly have also been affected by large societal changes that have happened over the past
100 years. Researchers believe industrialization and modernization have contributed greatly to lowering the
power, influence, and prestige the elderly once held. On the other hand, the sheer numbers of elderly people in
certain societies can have other effects, such as older people's influence on policies and politics based on their
voting influence.
The elderly have both benefited and suffered from these rapid social changes. In modern societies, a strong
economy created new levels of prosperity for many people. Healthcare has become more widely accessible,
and medicine has advanced, which allows the elderly to live longer. However, older people are not as essential
to the economic survival of their families and communities as they were in the past.
Studying Aging Populations
FIGURE 13.3 How old are these people? In modern U.S. society, appearance is not a reliable indicator of age. In
addition to genetic differences, health habits, hair dyes, and attitudes make traditional signs of aging increasingly
unreliable. (Credit: Jason Hargrove/flickr)
Since its creation in 1790, the U.S. Census Bureau has been tracking age in the population. Age is an important
factor to analyze with accompanying demographic figures, such as income and health. The population chart
below shows projected age distribution patterns for the next several decades.
13 • Aging and the Elderly

FIGURE 13.4 This population chart shows the population size of people in different age groups. The youngest age
group, at the bottom, remains largely static. The 18-64 age group has been growing and will continue to do so. But
most notable is the increasing size of the third tier (orange) representing ages 65-84. As the chapter discusses, this
group is growing significantly, shown by the increasing share of the overall graph it takes up. Also of note is the
group at the very top, which is also growing in size. (For comparison, can you even detect the line representing 85+
on the left side of the graph, closer to the year 1900?) (Credit: US Census Bureau.)
Statisticians use data to calculate the median age of a population, that is, the number that marks the halfway
point in a group’s age range. In the United States, the median age is about forty (U.S. Census Bureau 2010).
That means that about half of the people in the United States are under forty and about half are over forty. This
median age has been increasing, which indicates the population as a whole is growing older.
A cohort is a group of people who share a statistical or demographic trait. People belonging to the same age
cohort were born in the same time frame. Understanding a population’s age composition can point to certain
social and cultural factors and help governments and societies plan for future social and economic challenges.
Sociological studies on aging might help explain the difference between Native American age cohorts and the
general population. While Native American societies have a strong tradition of revering their elders, they also
have a lower life expectancy because of lack of access to healthcare and high levels of mercury in fish, which is
a traditional part of their diet.
Phases of Aging: The Young-Old, Middle-Old, and Old-Old
In the United States, all people over eighteen years old are considered adults, but there is a large difference
between a person who is twenty-one years old and a person who is forty-five years old. More specific
breakdowns, such as “young adult” and “middle-aged adult,” are helpful. In the same way, groupings are
helpful in understanding the elderly. The elderly are often lumped together to include everyone over the age of
sixty-five. But a sixty-five-year-old’s experience of life is much different from a ninety-year-old’s.
The United States’ older adult population can be divided into three life-stage subgroups: the young-old
(approximately sixty-five to seventy-four years old), the middle-old (ages seventy-five to eighty-four years old),
and the old-old (over age eighty-five). Today’s young-old age group is generally happier, healthier, and
financially better off than the young-old of previous generations. In the United States, people are better able to
prepare for aging because resources are more widely available.
Also, many people are making proactive quality-of-life decisions about their old age while they are still young.
In the past, family members made care decisions when an elderly person reached a health crisis, often leaving
the elderly person with little choice about what would happen. The elderly are now able to choose housing, for
example, that allows them some independence while still providing care when it is needed. Living wills,
retirement planning, and medical power of attorney are other concerns that are increasingly handled in
advance.
13.1 • Who Are the Elderly? Aging in Society

The Graying of the United States
FIGURE 13.5 Senior citizens are an important political constituency, and they may use their age to their advantage.
Originating in Canada in the late 1980s, groups of Raging Grannies have protested nuclear weapons, the Iraq War,
pesticides, genetically modified foods, and racial injustice. (Credit: Brave New Films/flickr)
What does it mean to be elderly? Some define it as an issue of physical health, while others simply define it by
chronological age. The U.S. government, for example, typically classifies people aged sixty-five years old as
elderly, at which point citizens are eligible for federal benefits such as Social Security and Medicare. The World
Health Organization has no standard, other than noting that sixty-five years old is the commonly accepted
definition in most core nations, but it suggests a cut-off somewhere between fifty and fifty-five years old for
semi-peripheral nations, such as those in Africa (World Health Organization 2012). AARP (formerly the
American Association of Retired Persons) cites fifty as the eligible age of membership. It is interesting to note
AARP’s name change; by taking the word “retired” out of its name, the organization can broaden its base to any
older people in the United States, not just retirees. This is especially important now that many people are
working to age seventy and beyond.
There is an element of social construction, both local and global, in the way individuals and nations define who
is elderly; that is, the shared meaning of the concept of elderly is created through interactions among people in
society. As the table demonstrates, different generations have varying perspectives on aging. Researchers
asked questions about the ages at which people reach certain milestones or new categories in life. Members of
the Baby Boom generation indicate that a person is officially "old" when they turn 73 years old. Millennials, a
much younger group, felt that people became old when they turned 59. The same survey asked questions
about the end of youth and the prime of life (Emling 2017). Interestingly, Boomers and GenXers both felt that
youth "ended" by age 31 and that the prime of life didn't start until many years later. Millennials felt that people
reached the prime of life at age 36, before youth ended at age 40. It's worth noting that at the time of the survey,
the Millennials were all 36 and younger.
13 • Aging and the Elderly

Boomer response
Gen X response
Millennial response
At what age does youth end?
At what age is the prime of life?
At what age is someone old?
TABLE 13.1 A survey conducted by the U.S. Trust gathered opinion data on the aging milestones
and categories. Boomers, Gen X people, and Millennials had generally different views.
Demographically, the U.S. population has undergone a massive shift both in the overall population of elderly
people and their share of the total population. Both are significant and impactful on major policy decisions and
day-to-day life. In 1900, the population of U.S people over sixty-five years old was 3 million, representing about
4 percent of the total population. That number increased to 33 million in 1994, and was roughly 12 percent of
the total population (Hobbs 1994). By 2016 that number had grown to 49 million, about 15 percent of the total
population (U.S. Census Bureau 2018). This is a greater than tenfold increase in the elderly population,
compared to a mere tripling of both the total population and of the population under sixty-five years old
(Hobbs 1994). This increase has been called “the graying of America,” a term that describes the phenomenon
of a larger and larger percentage of the population getting older and older. There are several reasons why the
United States is graying so rapidly. One of these is life expectancy: the average number of years a person born
today may expect to live. When we review Census Bureau statistics grouping the elderly by age, it is clear that
in the United States, at least, we are living longer. In 2010, there were about 80,000 centenarians in the United
States alone. They make up one of the fastest-growing segments of the population (Boston University School of
Medicine 2014).
It is interesting to note that not all people in the United States age equally. Most glaring is the difference
between men and women; as Figure 13.6 shows, women have longer life expectancies than men. In 2010, there
were ninety sixty-five-year-old men per one hundred sixty-five-year-old women. However, there were only
eighty seventy-five-year-old men per one hundred seventy-five-year-old women, and only sixty eighty-five-
year-old men per one hundred eighty-five-year-old women. Nevertheless, as the graph shows, the sex ratio
actually increased over time, indicating that men are closing the gap between their life spans and those of
women (U.S. Census Bureau 2010).
13.1 • Who Are the Elderly? Aging in Society

FIGURE 13.6 This U.S. Census graph shows the number of males per 100 females. However, over the past two
decades, men have narrowed the percentage by which women outlive them. (Credit: the U.S. Census Bureau)
Baby Boomers
Of particular interest to gerontologists today is the population of Baby Boomers, the cohort born between
1946 and 1964 and now reaching their 60s and 70s. Coming of age in the 1960s and early 1970s, the baby
boom generation was the first group of children and teenagers with their own spending power and therefore
their own marketing power (Macunovich 2000). As this group has aged, it has redefined what it means to be
young, middle-aged, and now old. People in the Boomer generation do not want to grow old the way their
grandparents did; the result is a wide range of products designed to ward off the effects—or the signs—of aging.
Previous generations of people over sixty-five were “old.” Baby Boomers are in “later life” or “the third age”
(Gilleard and Higgs 2007).
The baby boom generation is the cohort driving much of the dramatic increase in the over-sixty-five
population. Figure 13.7 shows a comparison of the U.S. population by age and gender between 2000 and 2010.
The biggest bulge in the pyramid (representing the largest population group) moves up the pyramid over the
course of the decade; in 2000, the largest population group was age thirty-five to fifty-five. In 2010, that group
was age forty-five to sixty-five, meaning the oldest baby Boomers were just reaching the age at which the U.S.
Census considers them elderly. By 2030, all Baby Boomers will be age 65 and older, and represent the largest
group of elderly people.
13 • Aging and the Elderly

FIGURE 13.7 Population by Age and Sex: 2000 and 2010. In this U.S. Census pyramid chart, the baby boom bulge
was aged thirty-five to fifty-five in 2000. In 2020, they were aged fifty-five to seventy-five. (Credit: the U.S. Census
Bureau)
This aging of the Baby Boom cohort has serious implications for our society. Healthcare is one of the areas
most impacted by this trend. According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, healthcare
spending is projected to grow by 5.5 percent each year from now until 2027. The portion of government
spending on Medicare (a program in which the government covers some costs of healthcare for the elderly) is
expected to increase from 3 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2009 to 8 percent of GDP in 2030, and
to 15 percent in 2080 (CMS 2018).
Certainly, as Boomers age, they will put increasing burdens on the entire U.S. healthcare system. The
American Geriatrics Society notes that from 2013-2025, there will be a 45 percent increase in demand for
physicians who specialize in geriatrics. As a result, over 33,000 specialists will be needed to fill the healthcare
needs in 2025. And in 2020, there were only 6,320 such specialists in the United States (AGS 2021).
Unlike the elderly of previous generations, Boomers do not expect that turning sixty-five means their active
lives are over. They are not willing to abandon work or leisure activities, but they may need more medical
support to keep living vigorous lives. This desire of a large group of over-sixty-five-year-olds wanting to
continue with a high activity level is driving innovation in the medical industry (Shaw n.d.).
The economic impact of aging Boomers is also an area of concern for many observers. Although the baby boom
generation earned more than previous generations and enjoyed a higher standard of living, they did not
adequately prepare for retirement. According to most retirement and investment experts, in order to maintain
their accustomed lifestyle, people need to save ten times their annual income before retiring. (Note: That's
income, not salary.) So if a person has an income of $60,000 per year, they should have saved $600,000. If they
made $100,000 per year, they should have saved $1 million. But most Baby Boomers have only saved an
estimated $144,000, and only 40 percent have saved more than $250,000 (Gravier 2021). The causes of these
shortfalls are varied, and include everything from lavish spending to economic recession to companies folding
and reducing pension payments. Higher education costs increased significantly while many Baby Boomers
13.1 • Who Are the Elderly? Aging in Society

were sending their children to college. No matter what the cause, many retirees report a great deal of stress
about running out of money.
Just as some observers are concerned about the possibility of Medicare being overburdened, Social Security is
considered to be at risk. Social Security is a government-run retirement program funded primarily through
payroll taxes. With enough people paying into the program, there should be enough money for retirees to take
out. But with the aging Boomer cohort starting to receive Social Security benefits and fewer workers paying
into the Social Security trust fund, economists warn that the system will collapse by the year 2037. A similar
warning came in the 1980s; in response to recommendations from the Greenspan Commission, the retirement
age (the age at which people could start receiving Social Security benefits) was raised from sixty-two to sixty-
seven and the payroll tax was increased. A similar hike in retirement age, perhaps to seventy, is a possible
solution to the current threat to Social Security.
Aging around the World
FIGURE 13.8 Cultural values and attitudes can shape people’s experience of aging. (Credit: Tom Coppen/flickr)
The United States is certainly not alone regarding its aging population; in fact, it doesn’t even have the fastest-
growing group of elderly people. In 2019, the world had 703 million people aged 65 years or over. By 2050, that
number is projected to double to 1.5 billion. One in six people in the world will be 65 or over (United Nations
2020).
This percentage is expected to increase and will have a huge impact on the dependency ratio: the number of
citizens not in the labor force (young, disabled, or elderly) to citizens in the labor force (Bartram and Roe
2005). One country that will soon face a serious aging crisis is China, which is on the cusp of an “aging boom”—
a period when its elderly population will dramatically increase. The number of people above age sixty in China
today is about 178 million, which amounts to 13.3 percent of its total population (Xuequan 2011). By 2050,
nearly a third of the Chinese population will be age sixty or older, which will put a significant burden on the
labor force and impact China’s economic growth (Bannister, Bloom, and Rosenberg 2010). On a more global
scale, the dependency ratio is projected to more than double in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia, Latin America
and the Caribbean, Northern Africa and Western Asia, and Central and Southern Asia.
As healthcare improves and life expectancy increases across the world, elder care will be an emerging issue.
Wienclaw (2009) suggests that with fewer working-age citizens available to provide home care and long-term
assisted care to the elderly, the costs of elder care will increase.
Worldwide, the expectation governing the amount and type of elder care varies from culture to culture. For
13 • Aging and the Elderly

example, in Asia the responsibility for elder care lies firmly on the family (Yap, Thang, and Traphagan 2005).
This is different from the approach in most Western countries, where the elderly are considered independent
and are expected to tend to their own care. It is not uncommon for family members to intervene only if the
elderly relative requires assistance, often due to poor health. Even then, caring for the elderly is considered
voluntary. In the United States, decisions to care for an elderly relative are often conditionally based on the
promise of future returns, such as inheritance or, in some cases, the amount of support the elderly provided to
the caregiver in the past (Hashimoto 1996).
These differences are based on cultural attitudes toward aging. In China, several studies have noted the
attitude of filial piety (deference and respect to one’s parents and ancestors in all things) as defining all other
virtues (Hsu 1971; Hamilton 1990). Cultural attitudes in Japan prior to approximately 1986 supported the idea
that the elderly deserve assistance (Ogawa and Retherford 1993). However, seismic shifts in major social
institutions (like family and economy) have created an increased demand for community and government
care. For example, the increase in women working outside the home has made it more difficult to provide in-
home care to aging parents, which leads to an increase in the need for government-supported institutions
(Raikhola and Kuroki 2009).
In the United States, by contrast, many people view caring for the elderly as a burden. Even when there is a
family member able and willing to provide for an elderly family member, 60 percent of family caregivers are
employed outside the home and are unable to provide the needed support. At the same time, however, many
middle-class families are unable to bear the financial burden of “outsourcing” professional healthcare,
resulting in gaps in care (Bookman and Kimbrel 2011). It is important to note that even within the United
States not all demographic groups treat aging the same way. While most people in the United States are
reluctant to place their elderly members into out-of-home assisted care, demographically speaking, the groups
least likely to do so are Latinos, African Americans, and Asians (Bookman and Kimbrel 2011).
Globally, the United States and other core nations are fairly well equipped to handle the demands of an
exponentially increasing elderly population. However, peripheral and semi-peripheral nations face similar
increases without comparable resources. Poverty among elders is a concern, especially among elderly women.
The feminization of the aging poor, evident in peripheral nations, is directly due to the number of elderly
women in those countries who are single, illiterate, and not a part of the labor force (Mujahid 2006).
In 2002, the Second World Assembly on Aging was held in Madrid, Spain, resulting in the Madrid Plan, an
internationally coordinated effort to create comprehensive social policies to address the needs of the
worldwide aging population. The plan identifies three themes to guide international policy on aging: 1)
publicly acknowledging the global challenges caused by, and the global opportunities created by, a rising
global population; 2) empowering the elderly; and 3) linking international policies on aging to international
policies on development (Zelenev 2008).
The Madrid Plan has not yet been successful in achieving all its aims. However, it has increased awareness of
the various issues associated with a global aging population, as well as raising the international consciousness
to the way that the factors influencing the vulnerability of the elderly (social exclusion, prejudice and
discrimination, and a lack of socio-legal protection) overlap with other developmental issues (basic human
rights, empowerment, and participation), leading to an increase in legal protections (Zelenev 2008).
13.2 The Process of Aging
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Explain the biological, social, and psychological changes that occur in aging
•
Describe the birth of the field of geriatrics
•
Examine attitudes toward death and dying and how they affect the elderly
•
Name the five stages of grief developed by Dr. Elisabeth Kübler-Ross
13.2 • The Process of Aging

As human beings grow older, they go through different phases or stages of life. It is helpful to understand aging
in the context of these phases. A life course is the period from birth to death, including a sequence of
predictable life events such as physical maturation. Each phase comes with different responsibilities and
expectations, which of course vary by individual and culture. Children love to play and learn, looking forward
to becoming preteens. As preteens begin to test their independence, they are eager to become teenagers.
Teenagers anticipate the promises and challenges of adulthood. Adults become focused on creating families,
building careers, and experiencing the world as independent people. Finally, many adults look forward to old
age as a wonderful time to enjoy life without as much pressure from work and family life. In old age,
grandparenthood can provide many of the joys of parenthood without all the hard work that parenthood
entails. And as work responsibilities abate, old age may be a time to explore hobbies and activities that there
was no time for earlier in life. But for other people, old age is not a phase that they look forward to. Some
people fear old age and do anything to “avoid” it by seeking medical and cosmetic fixes for the natural effects of
age. These differing views on the life course are the result of the cultural values and norms into which people
are socialized, but in most cultures, age is a master status influencing self-concept, as well as social roles and
interactions.
Through the phases of the life course, dependence and independence levels change. At birth, newborns are
dependent on caregivers for everything. As babies become toddlers and toddlers become adolescents and then
teenagers, they assert their independence more and more. Gradually, children come to be considered adults,
responsible for their own lives, although the point at which this occurs is widely varied among individuals,
families, and cultures.
As Riley (1978) notes, aging is a lifelong process and entails maturation and change on physical, psychological,
and social levels. Age, much like race, class, and gender, is a hierarchy in which some categories are more
highly valued than others. For example, while many children look forward to gaining independence, Packer
and Chasteen (2006) suggest that even in children, age prejudice leads to a negative view of aging. This, in
turn, can lead to a widespread segregation between the old and the young at the institutional, societal, and
cultural levels (Hagestad and Uhlenberg 2006).
Dr. Ignatz Nascher and the Birth of Geriatrics
In the early 1900s, a New York physician named Dr. Ignatz Nascher coined the term geriatrics, a medical
specialty that focuses on the elderly. He created the word by combining two Greek words: geron (old man) and
iatrikos (medical treatment). Nascher based his work on what he observed as a young medical student, when he
saw many acutely ill elderly people who were diagnosed simply as “being old.” There was nothing medicine
could do, his professors declared, about the syndrome of “old age.”
Nascher refused to accept this dismissive view, seeing it as medical neglect. He believed it was a doctor’s duty to
prolong life and relieve suffering whenever possible. In 1914, he published his views in his book Geriatrics: The
Diseases of Old Age and Their Treatment (Clarfield 1990). Nascher saw the practice of caring for the elderly as
separate from the practice of caring for the young, just as pediatrics (caring for children) is different from caring
for grown adults (Clarfield 1990).
Nascher had high hopes for his pioneering work. He wanted to treat the aging, especially those who were poor
and had no one to care for them. Many of the elderly poor were sent to live in “almshouses,” or public old-age
homes (Cole 1993). Conditions were often terrible in these almshouses, where the aging were often sent and just
forgotten.
As hard as it might be to believe today, Nascher’s approach was once considered unique. At the time of his death,
in 1944, he was disappointed that the field of geriatrics had not made greater strides. In what ways are the
SOCIOLOGICAL RESEARCH
13 • Aging and the Elderly

elderly better off today than they were before Nascher’s ideas gained acceptance?
Biological Changes
FIGURE 13.9 Aging can be a visible, public experience. Canes, scooters, and other necessities are recognized signs
of aging. Because of the meanings that culture assigns to these changes, people believe that being older means
being in physical decline. Many older people, however, remain healthy, active, and happy. (Credit: Phil Dolby/flickr)
Each person experiences age-related changes based on many factors. Biological factors, such as molecular and
cellular changes, are called primary aging, while aging that occurs due to controllable factors, such as lack of
physical exercise and poor diet, is called secondary aging (Whitbourne and Whitbourne 2010).
Most people begin to see signs of aging after fifty years old, when they notice the physical markers of age. Skin
becomes thinner, drier, and less elastic. Wrinkles form. Hair begins to thin and gray. Men prone to balding start
losing hair. The difficulty or relative ease with which people adapt to these changes is dependent in part on the
meaning given to aging by their particular culture. A culture that values youthfulness and beauty above all else
leads to a negative perception of growing old. Conversely, a culture that reveres the elderly for their life
experience and wisdom contributes to a more positive perception of what it means to grow old.
The effects of aging can feel daunting, and sometimes the fear of physical changes (like declining energy, food
sensitivity, and loss of hearing and vision) is more challenging to deal with than the changes themselves. The
way people perceive physical aging is largely dependent on how they were socialized. If people can accept the
changes in their bodies as a natural process of aging, the changes will not seem as frightening.
According to the federal Administration on Aging (2011), in 2009 fewer people over sixty-five years old
assessed their health as “excellent” or “very good” (41.6 percent) compared to those aged eighteen to sixty-
four (64.4 percent). Evaluating data from the National Center for Health Statistics and the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics, the Administration on Aging found that from 2006 to 2008, the most frequently reported health
issues for those over sixty-five years old included arthritis (50 percent), hypertension (38 percent), heart
disease (32 percent), and cancer (22 percent). About 27 percent of people age sixty and older are considered
obese by current medical standards. Parker and Thorslund (2006) found that while the trend is toward steady
improvement in most disability measures, there is a concomitant increase in functional impairments
(disability) and chronic diseases. At the same time, medical advances have reduced some of the disabling
effects of those diseases (Crimmins 2004).
13.2 • The Process of Aging

Some impacts of aging are gender-specific. Some of the disadvantages aging women face arise from long-
standing social gender roles. For example, Social Security favors men over women, inasmuch as women do not
earn Social Security benefits for the unpaid labor they perform (usually at home) as an extension of their
gender roles. In the healthcare field, elderly female patients are more likely than elderly men to see their
healthcare concerns trivialized (Sharp 1995) and are more likely to have their health issues labeled
psychosomatic (Munch 2004). Another female-specific aspect of aging is that mass-media outlets often depict
elderly females in terms of negative stereotypes and as less successful than older men (Bazzini and Mclntosh
I997).
For men, the process of aging—and society’s response to and support of the experience—may be quite
different. The gradual decrease in male sexual performance that occurs as a result of primary aging is
medicalized and constructed as needing treatment (Marshall and Katz 2002) so that a man may maintain a
sense of youthful masculinity. On the other hand, aging men have fewer opportunities to assert their
masculine identities in the company of other men (for example, through sports participation) (Drummond
1998). And some social scientists have observed that the aging male body is depicted in the Western world as
genderless (Spector-Mersel 2006).
FIGURE 13.10 Aging is accompanied by a host of biological, social, and psychological changes. Depending on their
health, older people can engage in the same activities they always have, or even try new ones. (Credit: Forest
Service Alaska Region/flickr)
Social and Psychological Changes
Male or female, growing older means confronting the psychological issues that come with entering the last
phase of life. Young people moving into adulthood take on new roles and responsibilities as their lives expand,
but an opposite arc can be observed in old age. What are the hallmarks of social and psychological change?
Retirement—the withdrawal from paid work at a certain age—is a relatively recent idea. Up until the late
nineteenth century, people worked about sixty hours a week until they were physically incapable of
continuing. Following the American Civil War, veterans receiving pensions were able to withdraw from the
workforce, and the number of working older men began declining. A second large decline in the number of
working men began in the post-World War II era, probably due to the availability of Social Security, and a third
large decline in the 1960s and 1970s was probably due to the social support offered by Medicare and the
increase in Social Security benefits (Munnell 2011).
In the twenty-first century, most people hope that at some point they will be able to stop working and enjoy the
fruits of their labor. But do we look forward to this time or fear it? When people retire from familiar work
13 • Aging and the Elderly

routines, some easily seek new hobbies, interests, and forms of recreation. Many find new groups and explore
new activities, but others may find it more difficult to adapt to new routines and loss of social roles, losing their
sense of self-worth in the process.
Each phase of life has challenges that come with the potential for fear. Erik H. Erikson (1902–1994), in his view
of socialization, broke the typical lifespan into eight phases. Each phase presents a particular challenge that
must be overcome. In the final stage, old age, the challenge is to embrace integrity over despair. Some people
are unable to successfully overcome the challenge. They may have to confront regrets, such as being
disappointed in their children’s lives or perhaps their own. They may have to accept that they will never reach
certain career goals. Or they must come to terms with what their career success has cost them, such as time
with their family or declining personal health. Others, however, are able to achieve a strong sense of integrity
and are able to embrace the new phase in life. When that happens, there is tremendous potential for creativity.
They can learn new skills, practice new activities, and peacefully prepare for the end of life.
For some, overcoming despair might entail remarriage after the death of a spouse. A study conducted by Kate
Davidson (2002) reviewed demographic data that asserted men were more likely to remarry after the death of
a spouse and suggested that widows (the surviving female spouse of a deceased male partner) and widowers
(the surviving male spouse of a deceased female partner) experience their postmarital lives differently. Many
surviving women enjoyed a new sense of freedom, since they were living alone for the first time. On the other
hand, for surviving men, there was a greater sense of having lost something, because they were now deprived
of a constant source of care as well as the focus of their emotional life.
Aging and Sexuality
FIGURE 13.11 In Harold and Maude, a 1971 cult classic movie, a twenty-something young man falls in love with a
seventy-nine-year-old woman. The world disapproves. (Credit: luckyjackson/flickr)
Although it is sometimes difficult to have an open, public national dialogue about aging and sexuality, the
reality is that our sexual selves do not disappear after age sixty-five. People continue to enjoy sex—and not
always safe sex—well into their later years. In fact, some research suggests that as many as one in five new
cases of AIDS occurs in adults over sixty-five years old (Hillman 2011).
In some ways, old age may be a time to enjoy sex more, not less. For women, the elder years can bring a sense
of relief as the fear of an unwanted pregnancy is removed and the children are grown and taking care of
themselves. However, while we have expanded the number of psycho-pharmaceuticals to address sexual
dysfunction in men, it was not until recently that the medical field acknowledged the existence of female
sexual dysfunctions (Bryant 2004). Additional treatments have been developed or applied to address sexual
desire or dysfunction, which sometimes leads members of both sexes to believe that problems are easily
13.2 • The Process of Aging

resolved. But emotional and social factors play an important role, and medications on their own cannot resolve
all issues (Nonacs 2018).
Aging and sexuality also concerns relationships between people of different ages, referred to as age-gap
relationships by researchers. These types of relationships are certainly not confined to the elderly, but people
often make assumptions about elderly people in romantic relationships with younger people (and vice versa).
Research into age-gap relationships indicates that social pressure can have impacts on relationship
commitment or lead to break ups. The life stages of the people can also have impacts, especially if one of them
is elderly and the other is not (Karantzas 2018). A relationship between a 30-year-old and a 45-year-old most
likely involves fewer discussions about serious health issues and retirement decisions than one between a
55-year-old and a 70-year-old. Both have 15-year age gaps, but the circumstances are quite different.
Aging “Out:” LGBTQ Seniors
FIGURE 13.12 As same-sex marriage becomes a possibility, many gay and lesbian couples are finally able to tie the
knot—sometimes as seniors—after decades of waiting. (Credit: Fibonacci Blue/flickr).
How do different groups in our society experience the aging process? Are there any experiences that are universal,
or do different populations have different experiences? An emerging field of study looks at how lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, and queer/questioning (LGBTQ) people experience the aging process and how their
experience differs from that of other groups or the dominant group. This issue is expanding with the aging of the
baby boom generation; not only will aging boomers represent a huge bump in the general elderly population but
also the number of LGBTQ seniors is expected to double by 2030 (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011).
A recent study titled The Aging and Health Report: Disparities and Resilience among Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender Older Adults finds that LGBTQ older adults have higher rates of disability and depression than their
heterosexual peers. They are also less likely to have a support system that might provide elder care: a partner and
supportive children (Fredriksen-Goldsen et al. 2011). Even for those LGBTQ seniors who are partnered, some states
do not recognize a legal relationship between two people of the same sex, which reduces their legal protection and
financial options.
As they transition to assisted-living facilities, LGBTQ people have the added burden of “disclosure management:”
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
13 • Aging and the Elderly

the way they share their sexual and relationship identity. In one case study, a seventy-eight-year-old lesbian woman
lived alone in a long-term care facility. She had been in a long-term relationship of thirty-two years and had been
visibly active in the LGBTQ community earlier in her life. However, in the long-term care setting, she was much
quieter about her sexual orientation. She “selectively disclosed” her sexual identity, feeling safer with anonymity
and silence (Jenkins et al. 2010). A study from the National Senior Citizens Law Center reports that only 22 percent
of LGBTQ older adults expect they could be open about their sexual orientation or gender identity in a long-term
care facility. Even more telling is the finding that only 16 percent of non-LGBTQ older adults expected that LGBTQ
people could be open with facility staff (National Senior Citizens Law Center 2011).
Same-sex marriage—a civil rights battleground that is being fought in many states—can have major implications for
the way the LGBTQ community ages. With marriage comes the legal and financial protection afforded to opposite-
sex couples, as well as less fear of exposure and a reduction in the need to “retreat to the closet” (Jenkins et al.
2010). Changes in this area are coming slowly, and in the meantime, advocates have many policy recommendations
for how to improve the aging process for LGBTQ individuals. These recommendations include increasing federal
research on LGBTQ elders, increasing (and enforcing existing) laws against discrimination, and amending the federal
Family and Medical Leave Act to cover LGBTQ caregivers (Grant 2009).
Death and Dying
FIGURE 13.13 A young man sits at the grave of his great-grandmother. (Credit: Sara Goldsmith/flickr)
For most of human history, the standard of living was significantly lower than it is now. Humans struggled to
survive with few amenities and very limited medical technology. The risk of death due to disease or accident
was high in any life stage, and life expectancy was low. As people began to live longer, death became associated
with old age.
For many teenagers and young adults, losing a grandparent or another older relative can be the first loss of a
loved one they experience. It may be their first encounter with grief, a psychological, emotional, and social
response to the feelings of loss that accompanies death or a similar event.
People tend to perceive death, their own and that of others, based on the values of their culture. While some
may look upon death as the natural conclusion to a long, fruitful life, others may find the prospect of dying
frightening to contemplate. People tend to have strong resistance to the idea of their own death, and strong
13.2 • The Process of Aging

emotional reactions of loss to the death of loved ones. Viewing death as a loss, as opposed to a natural or
tranquil transition, is often considered normal in the United States.
What may be surprising is how few studies were conducted on death and dying prior to the 1960s. Death and
dying were fields that had received little attention until a psychologist named Elisabeth Kübler-Ross began
observing people who were in the process of dying. As Kübler-Ross witnessed people’s transition toward death,
she found some common threads in their experiences. She observed that the process had five distinct stages:
denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and acceptance. She published her findings in a 1969 book called On
Death and Dying. The book remains a classic on the topic today.
Kübler-Ross found that a person’s first reaction to the prospect of dying is denial: this is characterized by the
person's not wanting to believe he or she is dying, with common thoughts such as “I feel fine” or “This is not
really happening to me.” The second stage is anger, when loss of life is seen as unfair and unjust. A person then
resorts to the third stage, bargaining: trying to negotiate with a higher power to postpone the inevitable by
reforming or changing the way he or she lives. The fourth stage, psychological depression, allows for
resignation as the situation begins to seem hopeless. In the final stage, a person adjusts to the idea of death
and reaches acceptance. At this point, the person can face death honestly, by regarding it as a natural and
inevitable part of life and can make the most of their remaining time.
The work of Kübler-Ross was eye-opening when it was introduced. It broke new ground and opened the doors
for sociologists, social workers, health practitioners, and therapists to study death and help those who were
facing death. Kübler-Ross’s work is generally considered a major contribution to thanatology: the systematic
study of death and dying.
Of special interests to thanatologists is the concept of “dying with dignity.” Modern medicine includes
advanced medical technology that may prolong life without a parallel improvement to the quality of life one
may have. In some cases, people may not want to continue living when they are in constant pain and no longer
enjoying life. Should patients have the right to choose to die with dignity? Dr. Jack Kevorkian was a staunch
advocate for physician-assisted suicide: the voluntary or physician-assisted use of lethal medication provided
by a medical doctor to end one’s life. This right to have a doctor help a patient die with dignity is controversial.
In the United States, Oregon was the first state to pass a law allowing physician-assisted suicides. In 1997,
Oregon instituted the Death with Dignity Act, which required the presence of two physicians for a legal assisted
suicide. This law was successfully challenged by U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft in 2001, but the appeals
process ultimately upheld the Oregon law. As of 2019, seven states and the District of Columbia have passed
similar laws allowing physician assisted suicide.
The controversy surrounding death with dignity laws is emblematic of the way our society tries to separate
itself from death. Health institutions have built facilities to comfortably house those who are terminally ill.
This is seen as a compassionate act, helping relieve the surviving family members of the burden of caring for
the dying relative. But studies almost universally show that people prefer to die in their own homes (Lloyd,
White, and Sutton 2011). Is it our social responsibility to care for elderly relatives up until their death? How do
we balance the responsibility for caring for an elderly relative with our other responsibilities and obligations?
As our society grows older, and as new medical technology can prolong life even further, the answers to these
questions will develop and change.
The changing concept of hospice is an indicator of our society’s changing view of death. Hospice is a type of
healthcare that treats terminally ill people when “cure-oriented treatments” are no longer an option (Hospice
Foundation of America 2012b). Hospice doctors, nurses, and therapists receive special training in the care of
the dying. The focus is not on getting better or curing the illness, but on passing out of this life in comfort and
peace. Hospice centers exist as a place where people can go to die in comfort, and increasingly, hospice
services encourage at-home care so that someone has the comfort of dying in a familiar environment,
surrounded by family (Hospice Foundation of America 2012a). While many of us would probably prefer to
avoid thinking of the end of our lives, it may be possible to take comfort in the idea that when we do approach
13 • Aging and the Elderly

death in a hospice setting, it is in a familiar, relatively controlled place.
13.3 Challenges Facing the Elderly
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Interpret the historical and current trends of poverty among elderly populations
•
Recognize ageist thinking and ageist attitudes in individuals and institutions
•
Identify risks factors and outcomes regarding mistreatment and abuse of elderly individuals
Aging comes with many challenges. The loss of independence is one potential part of the process, as are
diminished physical ability and age discrimination. The term senescence refers to the aging process,
including biological, emotional, intellectual, social, and spiritual changes. This section discusses some of the
challenges we encounter during this process.
As already observed, many older adults remain highly self-sufficient. Others require more care. Because the
elderly typically no longer hold jobs, finances can be a challenge. And due to cultural misconceptions, older
people can be targets of ridicule and stereotypes. The elderly face many challenges in later life, but they do not
have to enter old age without dignity.
Poverty
FIGURE 13.14 While elderly poverty rates showed an improvement trend for decades, the 2008 recession has
changed some older people’s financial futures. Some who had planned a leisurely retirement have found themselves
at risk of late-age destitution. (Credit: (a) Michael Cohen/flickr; Photo (b) Alex Proimos/flickr)
For many people in the United States, growing older once meant living with less income. In 1960, almost 35
percent of the elderly existed on poverty-level incomes. A generation ago, the nation’s oldest populations had
the highest risk of living in poverty.
At the start of the twenty-first century, the older population was putting an end to that trend. Among people
over sixty-five years old, the poverty rate fell from 30 percent in 1967 to 9.7 percent in 2008, well below the
national average of 13.2 percent (U.S. Census Bureau 2009). However, given the subsequent recession, which
severely reduced the retirement savings of many while taxing public support systems, how are the elderly
affected? According to the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, the national poverty rate
among the elderly had risen to 14 percent by 2010 (Urban Institute and Kaiser Commission 2010).
Before the recession hit, what had changed to cause a reduction in poverty among the elderly? What social
patterns contributed to the shift? For several decades, a greater number of women joined the workforce. More
married couples earned double incomes during their working years and saved more money for their
13.3 • Challenges Facing the Elderly

retirement. Private employers and governments began offering better retirement programs. By 1990, senior
citizens reported earning 36 percent more income on average than they did in 1980; that was five times the
rate of increase for people under age thirty-five (U.S. Census Bureau 2009).
In addition, many people were gaining access to better healthcare. New trends encouraged people to live more
healthful lifestyles by placing an emphasis on exercise and nutrition. There was also greater access to
information about the health risks of behaviors such as cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, and drug use.
Because they were healthier, many older people continue to work past the typical retirement age and provide
more opportunity to save for retirement. Will these patterns return once the recession ends? Sociologists will
be watching to see. In the meantime, they are realizing the immediate impact of the recession on elderly
poverty.
During the recession, older people lost some of the financial advantages that they’d gained in the 1980s and
1990s. From October 2007 to October 2009 the values of retirement accounts for people over age fifty lost 18
percent of their value. The sharp decline in the stock market also forced many to delay their retirement
(Administration on Aging 2009).
Ageism
FIGURE 13.15 Are these street signs humorous or offensive? What shared assumptions make them humorous? Or
is memory loss too serious to be made fun of? (Credit: Tumbleweed/flickr)
Driving to the grocery store, Peter, twenty-three years old, got stuck behind a car on a four-lane main artery
through his city’s business district. The speed limit was thirty-five miles per hour, and while most drivers sped
along at forty to forty-five mph, the driver in front of him was going the minimum speed. Peter tapped on his
horn. He tailgated the driver. Finally, Peter had a chance to pass the car. He glanced over. Sure enough, Peter
thought, a gray-haired old man guilty of “DWE,” driving while elderly.
At the grocery store, Peter waited in the checkout line behind an older woman. She paid for her groceries, lifted
her bags of food into her cart, and toddled toward the exit. Peter, guessing her to be about eighty years old, was
reminded of his grandmother. He paid for his groceries and caught up with her.
“Can I help you with your cart?” he asked.
“No, thank you. I can get it myself,” she said and marched off toward her car.
Peter’s responses to both older people, the driver and the shopper, were prejudiced. In both cases, he made
unfair assumptions. He assumed the driver drove cautiously simply because the man was a senior citizen, and
he assumed the shopper needed help carrying her groceries just because she was an older woman.
13 • Aging and the Elderly

Responses like Peter’s toward older people are fairly common. He didn’t intend to treat people differently
based on personal or cultural biases, but he did. Ageism is discrimination (when someone acts on a prejudice)
based on age. Dr. Robert Butler coined the term in 1968, noting that ageism exists in all cultures (Brownell).
Ageist attitudes and biases based on stereotypes reduce elderly people to inferior or limited positions.
Ageism can vary in severity. Peter’s attitudes are probably seen as fairly mild, but relating to the elderly in
ways that are patronizing can be offensive. When ageism is reflected in the workplace, in healthcare, and in
assisted-living facilities, the effects of discrimination can be more severe. Ageism can make older people fear
losing a job, feel dismissed by a doctor, or feel a lack of power and control in their daily living situations.
In early societies, the elderly were respected and revered. Many preindustrial societies observed
gerontocracy, a type of social structure wherein the power is held by a society’s oldest members. In some
countries today, the elderly still have influence and power and their vast knowledge is respected. Reverence for
the elderly is still a part of some cultures, but it has changed in many places because of social factors.
In many modern nations, however, industrialization contributed to the diminished social standing of the
elderly. Today wealth, power, and prestige are also held by those in younger age brackets. The average age of
corporate executives was fifty-nine years old in 1980. In 2008, the average age had lowered to fifty-four years
old (Stuart 2008). Some older members of the workforce felt threatened by this trend and grew concerned that
younger employees in higher level positions would push them out of the job market. Rapid advancements in
technology and media have required new skill sets that older members of the workforce are less likely to have.
Changes happened not only in the workplace but also at home. In agrarian societies, a married couple cared
for their aging parents. The oldest members of the family contributed to the household by doing chores,
cooking, and helping with child care. As economies shifted from agrarian to industrial, younger generations
moved to cities to work in factories. The elderly began to be seen as an expensive burden. They did not have
the strength and stamina to work outside the home. What began during industrialization, a trend toward older
people living apart from their grown children, has become commonplace. As you saw in the opening, children
of older people can also feel guilt, sadness, and sometimes anger at both taking care of aging parents and with
accepting that their parents are losing their abilities. Living apart, especially if an older person is moved to a
nursing home or other facility, can often exacerbate these issues.
Mistreatment and Abuse
Mistreatment and abuse of the elderly is a major social problem. As expected, with the biology of aging, the
elderly sometimes become physically frail. This frailty renders them dependent on others for care—sometimes
for small needs like household tasks, and sometimes for assistance with basic functions like eating and
toileting. Unlike a child, who also is dependent on another for care, an elder is an adult with a lifetime of
experience, knowledge, and opinions—a more fully developed person. This makes the care-providing situation
more complex.
Elder abuse occurs when a caretaker intentionally deprives an older person of care or harms the person in his
or her charge. Caregivers may be family members, relatives, friends, health professionals, or employees of
senior housing or nursing care. The elderly may be subject to many different types of abuse.
In a 2009 study on the topic led by Dr. Ron Acierno, the team of researchers identified five major categories of
elder abuse: 1) physical abuse, such as hitting or shaking, 2) sexual abuse, including rape and coerced nudity,
3) psychological or emotional abuse, such as verbal harassment or humiliation, 4) neglect or failure to provide
adequate care, and 5) financial abuse or exploitation (Acierno 2010).
The National Center on Elder Abuse (NCEA), a division of the U.S. Administration on Aging, also identifies
abandonment and self-neglect as types of abuse. Table 13.2 shows some of the signs and symptoms that the
NCEA encourages people to notice.
13.3 • Challenges Facing the Elderly

Type of Abuse
Signs and Symptoms
Physical abuse
Bruises, untreated wounds, sprains, broken glasses, lab findings of medication
overdose
Sexual abuse
Bruises around breasts or genitals, torn or bloody underclothing, unexplained
venereal disease
Emotional/psychological
abuse
Being upset or withdrawn, unusual dementia-like behavior (rocking, sucking)
Neglect
Poor hygiene, untreated bed sores, dehydration, soiled bedding
Financial
Sudden changes in banking practices, inclusion of additional names on bank cards,
abrupt changes to will
Self-neglect
Untreated medical conditions, unclean living area, lack of medical items like
dentures or glasses
TABLE 13.2 Signs of Elder Abuse The National Center on Elder Abuse encourages people to watch for these signs of
mistreatment. (Credit: National Center on Elder Abuse)
How prevalent is elder abuse? Two recent U.S. studies found that roughly one in ten elderly people surveyed
had suffered at least one form of elder abuse. Some social researchers believe elder abuse is underreported
and that the number may be higher. The risk of abuse also increases in people with health issues such as
dementia (Kohn and Verhoek-Oftedahl 2011). Older women were found to be victims of verbal abuse more
often than their male counterparts.
In Acierno’s study, which included a sample of 5,777 respondents aged sixty and older, 5.2 percent of
respondents reported financial abuse, 5.1 percent said they’d been neglected, and 4.6 endured emotional
abuse (Acierno 2010). The prevalence of physical and sexual abuse was lower at 1.6 and 0.6 percent,
respectively (Acierno 2010).
Other studies have focused on the caregivers to the elderly in an attempt to discover the causes of elder abuse.
Researchers identified factors that increased the likelihood of caregivers perpetrating abuse against those in
their care. Those factors include inexperience, having other demands such as jobs (for those who weren’t
professionally employed as caregivers), caring for children, living full-time with the dependent elder, and
experiencing high stress, isolation, and lack of support (Kohn and Verhoek-Oftedahl 2011).
A history of depression in the caregiver was also found to increase the likelihood of elder abuse. Neglect was
more likely when care was provided by paid caregivers. Many of the caregivers who physically abused elders
were themselves abused—in many cases, when they were children. Family members with some sort of
dependency on the elder in their care were more likely to physically abuse that elder. For example, an adult
child caring for an elderly parent while at the same time depending on some form of income from that parent,
is considered more likely to perpetrate physical abuse (Kohn and Verhoek-Oftedahl 2011).
A survey in Florida found that 60.1 percent of caregivers reported verbal aggression as a style of conflict
resolution. Paid caregivers in nursing homes were at a high risk of becoming abusive if they had low job
satisfaction, treated the elderly like children, or felt burnt out (Kohn and Verhoek-Oftedahl 2011). Caregivers
who tended to be verbally abusive were found to have had less training, lower education, and higher likelihood
of depression or other psychiatric disorders. Based on the results of these studies, many housing facilities for
13 • Aging and the Elderly

seniors have increased their screening procedures for caregiver applicants.
World War II Veterans
FIGURE 13.16 World War II (1941–1945) veterans and members of an Honor Flight from Milwaukee, Wisconsin,
visit the National World War II Memorial in Washington, DC. Most of these men and women were in their late
teens or twenties when they served. (Credit: Sean Hackbarth/flickr)
World War II was a defining event in recent human history, and set the stage for America to become an economic
and military superpower. Over 16 million Americans served in the war—an enormous amount on any scale, but
especially significant considering that the U.S. had almost 200 million fewer people than it does today. That
sizable and significant group is aging. Many are in their eighties and nineties, and many others have already
passed on. Of the 16 million, less than 300,000 are alive. Data suggest that by 2036, there will be no living
veterans of WWII (U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs).
When these veterans came home from the war and ended their service, little was known about posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). These heroes did not receive the mental and physical healthcare that could have helped
them. As a result, many of them, now in old age, are dealing with the effects of PTSD. Research suggests a high
percentage of World War II veterans are plagued by flashback memories and isolation, and that many “self-
medicate” with alcohol.
Research has found that veterans of any conflict are more than twice as likely as nonveterans to commit suicide,
with rates highest among the oldest veterans. Reports show that WWII-era veterans are four times as likely to
take their own lives as people of the same age with no military service (Glantz 2010).
In May 2004, the National World War II Memorial in Washington, DC, was completed and dedicated to honor
those who served during the conflict. Dr. Earl Morse, a physician and retired Air Force captain, treated many
WWII veterans. He encouraged them to visit the memorial, knowing it could help them heal. Many WWII
veterans expressed interest in seeing the memorial. Unfortunately, many were in their eighties and were neither
physically nor financially able to travel on their own. Dr. Morse arranged to personally escort some of the
veterans and enlisted volunteer pilots who would pay for the flights themselves. He also raised money, insisting
the veterans pay nothing. By the end of 2005, 137 veterans, many using wheelchairs, had made the trip. The
BIG PICTURE
13.3 • Challenges Facing the Elderly

Honor Flight Network was up and running.
As of 2017, the Honor Flight Network had flown more than 200,000 U.S. veterans of World War II, the Korean
War, and the Vietnam War to Washington. The round-trip flights leave for day-long trips from over 140 airports in
thirty states, staffed by volunteers who care for the needs of the elderly travelers (Honor Flight Network 2021).
13.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Aging
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Compare and contrast sociological theoretical perspectives on aging
What roles do individual senior citizens play in your life? How do you relate to and interact with older people?
What role do they play in neighborhoods and communities, in cities and in states? Sociologists are interested
in exploring the answers to questions such as these through three different perspectives: functionalism,
symbolic interactionism, and conflict theory.
Functionalism
Functionalists analyze how the parts of society work together. Functionalists gauge how society’s parts are
working together to keep society running smoothly. How does this perspective address aging? The elderly, as a
group, are one of society’s vital parts.
Functionalists find that people with better resources who stay active in other roles adjust better to old age
(Crosnoe and Elder 2002). Three social theories within the functional perspective were developed to explain
how older people might deal with later-life experiences.
FIGURE 13.17 Does being old mean disengaging from the world? (Credit: Candida Performa/Wikimedia Commons)
The earliest gerontological theory in the functionalist perspective is disengagement theory, which suggests
that withdrawing from society and social relationships is a natural part of growing old. There are several main
points to the theory. First, because everyone expects to die one day, and because we experience physical and
mental decline as we approach death, it is natural to withdraw from individuals and society. Second, as the
elderly withdraw, they receive less reinforcement to conform to social norms. Therefore, this withdrawal
allows a greater freedom from the pressure to conform. Finally, social withdrawal is gendered, meaning it is
experienced differently by men and women. Because men focus on work and women focus on marriage and
family, when they withdraw they will be unhappy and directionless until they adopt a role to replace their
accustomed role that is compatible with the disengaged state (Cummings and Henry 1961).
13 • Aging and the Elderly

The suggestion that old age was a distinct state in the life course, characterized by a distinct change in roles
and activities, was groundbreaking when it was first introduced. However, the theory is no longer accepted in
its classic form. Criticisms typically focus on the application of the idea that seniors universally naturally
withdraw from society as they age, and that it does not allow for a wide variation in the way people experience
aging (Hothschild 1975).
The social withdrawal that Cummings and Henry recognized (1961), and its notion that elderly people need to
find replacement roles for those they’ve lost, is addressed anew in activity theory. According to this theory,
activity levels and social involvement are key to this process, and key to happiness (Havinghurst 1961;
Neugarten 1964; Havinghurst, Neugarten, and Tobin 1968). According to this theory, the more active and
involved an elderly person is, the happier he or she will be. Critics of this theory point out that access to social
opportunities and activity are not equally available to all. Moreover, not everyone finds fulfillment in the
presence of others or participation in activities. Reformulations of this theory suggest that participation in
informal activities, such as hobbies, are what most affect later life satisfaction (Lemon, Bengtson, and Petersen
1972).
According to continuity theory, the elderly make specific choices to maintain consistency in internal
(personality structure, beliefs) and external structures (relationships), remaining active and involved
throughout their elder years. This is an attempt to maintain social equilibrium and stability by making future
decisions on the basis of already developed social roles (Atchley 1971; Atchley 1989). One criticism of this
theory is its emphasis on so-called “normal” aging, which marginalizes those with chronic diseases such as
Alzheimer’s.
13.4 • Theoretical Perspectives on Aging

The Graying of American Prisons
FIGURE 13.18 Would you want to spend your retirement here? A growing elderly prison population requires asking
questions about how to deal with senior inmates. (Credit: Claire Rowland/Wikimedia Commons)
The COVID-19 pandemic placed a particular burden on prison populations and government officials who manage
them. Many people unfamiliar with American prisons may have assumed this concern was due to the obvious:
Prisons are by definition confined spaces, where space and freedom are in short supply. Incarcerated people often
share cells, restrooms, and other facilities. These are all contributing factors to the grave concerns about prisoners
and COVID. But they were all exacerbated by the one overall comorbidity for the coronavirus: age.
Just like elderly people outside of prison generally suffered the most from the disease, the same age group was
highly susceptible in prison. Perhaps the most dire circumstance is the size and percentage of that age group in
prison. By the time the pandemic hit, the population of people over 50 in American prisons was, for the first time in
history, larger than every other age group, and nearly 200,000 people in correctional facilities were 55 and over.
That portion of the prison population tripled from 2000 to 2016 (Li 2020).
Two factors contribute significantly to this country’s aging prison population. One is the tough-on-crime reforms of
the 1980s and 1990s, when mandatory minimum sentencing and “three strikes” policies sent many people to jail
for thirty years to life, even when the third strike was a relatively minor offense. Many of today’s elderly prisoners are
those who were incarcerated thirty years ago for life sentences. The other factor influencing today’s aging prison
population is the aging of the overall population. As discussed in the section on aging in the United States, the
percentage of people over sixty-five years old is increasing each year due to rising life expectancies and the aging of
the Baby Boom generation.
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
13 • Aging and the Elderly

So why should it matter that the elderly prison population is growing so swiftly? As discussed in the section on the
process of aging, growing older is accompanied by a host of physical problems, like failing vision, mobility, and
hearing. Chronic illnesses like heart disease, arthritis, and diabetes also become increasingly common as people
age, whether they are in prison or not. In many cases, elderly prisoners are physically incapable of committing a
violent—or possibly any—crime. Is it ethical to keep them locked up for the short remainder of their lives? And is it
practical?
Aging inmates require far more healthcare, which places massive burdens on prison budgets and expenditures.
When the healthcare costs are considered, some officials estimate the costs of incarcerating an aging person to be
three times higher than to keep a younger person in prison. On the flip side, reducing prison sentences in Maryland
saved an estimated $185 million over five years. When considering that many of these elderly people have served
the majority of their sentence and generally pose a lower risk to society, many people in the corrections system
itself advocate for releasing them early (Reese 2019).
Conflict Perspective
FIGURE 13.19 At a public protest, older people make their voices heard. In advocating for themselves, they help
shape public policy and alter the allotment of available resources. (Credit: longislandwins/flickr)
Theorists working the conflict perspective view society as inherently unstable, an institution that privileges the
powerful wealthy few while marginalizing everyone else. According to the guiding principle of conflict theory,
social groups compete with other groups for power and scarce resources. Applied to society’s aging
population, the principle means that the elderly struggle with other groups—for example, younger society
members—to retain a certain share of resources. At some point, this competition may become conflict.
For example, some people complain that the elderly get more than their fair share of society’s resources. In
hard economic times, there is great concern about the huge costs of Social Security and Medicare. One of every
four tax dollars, or about 28 percent, is spent on these two programs. In 1950, the federal government paid
$781 million in Social Security payments. Now, the payments are 870 times higher. In 2008, the government
paid $296 billion (Statistical Abstract 2011). The medical bills of the nation’s elderly population are rising
dramatically. While there is more care available to certain segments of the senior community, it must be noted
that the financial resources available to the aging can vary tremendously by race, social class, and gender.
There are three classic theories of aging within the conflict perspective. Modernization theory (Cowgill and
Holmes 1972) suggests that the primary cause of the elderly losing power and influence in society are the
13.4 • Theoretical Perspectives on Aging

parallel forces of industrialization and modernization. As societies modernize, the status of elders decreases,
and they are increasingly likely to experience social exclusion. Before industrialization, strong social norms
bound the younger generation to care for the older. Now, as societies industrialize, the nuclear family replaces
the extended family. Societies become increasingly individualistic, and norms regarding the care of older
people change. In an individualistic industrial society, caring for an elderly relative is seen as a voluntary
obligation that may be ignored without fear of social censure.
The central reasoning of modernization theory is that as long as the extended family is the standard family, as
in preindustrial economies, elders will have a place in society and a clearly defined role. As societies
modernize, the elderly, unable to work outside of the home, have less to offer economically and are seen as a
burden. This model may be applied to both the developed and the developing world, and it suggests that as
people age they will be abandoned and lose much of their familial support since they become a nonproductive
economic burden.
Another theory in the conflict perspective is age stratification theory (Riley, Johnson, and Foner 1972).
Though it may seem obvious now, with our awareness of ageism, age stratification theorists were the first to
suggest that members of society might be stratified by age, just as they are stratified by race, class, and gender.
Because age serves as a basis of social control, different age groups will have varying access to social resources
such as political and economic power. Within societies, behavioral age norms, including norms about roles and
appropriate behavior, dictate what members of age cohorts may reasonably do. For example, it might be
considered deviant for an elderly woman to wear a bikini because it violates norms denying the sexuality of
older females. These norms are specific to each age strata, developing from culturally based ideas about how
people should “act their age.”
Thanks to amendments to the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), which drew attention to some of
the ways in which our society is stratified based on age, U.S. workers no longer must retire upon reaching a
specified age. As first passed in 1967, the ADEA provided protection against a broad range of age
discrimination and specifically addressed termination of employment due to age, age specific layoffs,
advertised positions specifying age limits or preferences, and denial of healthcare benefits to those over sixty-
five years old (U.S. EEOC 2012).
Age stratification theory has been criticized for its broadness and its inattention to other sources of
stratification and how these might intersect with age. For example, one might argue that an older white male
occupies a more powerful role, and is far less limited in his choices, compared to an older white female based
on his historical access to political and economic power.
Finally, exchange theory (Dowd 1975), a rational choice approach, suggests we experience an increased
dependence as we age and must increasingly submit to the will of others because we have fewer ways of
compelling others to submit to us. Indeed, inasmuch as relationships are based on mutual exchanges, as the
elderly become less able to exchange resources, they will see their social circles diminish. In this model, the
only means to avoid being discarded is to engage in resource management, like maintaining a large
inheritance or participating in social exchange systems via child care. In fact, the theory may depend too much
on the assumption that individuals are calculating. It is often criticized for affording too much emphasis to
material exchange and devaluing nonmaterial assets such as love and friendship.
13 • Aging and the Elderly

FIGURE 13.20 The subculture of aging theory posits that the elderly create their own communities because they
have been excluded from other groups. (Credit: Icnacio Palomo Duarte/flickr)
Symbolic Interactionism
Generally, theories within the symbolic interactionist perspective focus on how society is created through the
day-to-day interaction of individuals, as well as the way people perceive themselves and others based on
cultural symbols. This microanalytic perspective assumes that if people develop a sense of identity through
their social interactions, their sense of self is dependent on those interactions. A woman whose main
interactions with society make her feel old and unattractive may lose her sense of self. But a woman whose
interactions make her feel valued and important will have a stronger sense of self and a happier life.
Symbolic interactionists stress that the changes associated with old age, in and of themselves, have no
inherent meaning. Nothing in the nature of aging creates any particular, defined set of attitudes. Rather,
attitudes toward the elderly are rooted in society.
One microanalytical theory is Rose’s (1962) subculture of aging theory, which focuses on the shared
community created by the elderly when they are excluded (due to age), voluntarily or involuntarily, from
participating in other groups. This theory suggests that elders will disengage from society and develop new
patterns of interaction with peers who share common backgrounds and interests. For example, a group
consciousness may develop within such groups as AARP around issues specific to the elderly like the Medicare
“doughnut hole,” focused on creating social and political pressure to fix those issues. Whether brought
together by social or political interests, or even geographic regions, elders may find a strong sense of
community with their new group.
Another theory within the symbolic interaction perspective is selective optimization with compensation
theory. Baltes and Baltes (1990) based their theory on the idea that successful personal development
throughout the life course and subsequent mastery of the challenges associated with everyday life are based
on the components of selection, optimization, and compensation. Though this happens at all stages in the life
course, in the field of gerontology, researchers focus attention on balancing the losses associated with aging
with the gains stemming from the same. Here, aging is a process and not an outcome, and the goals
(compensation) are specific to the individual.
According to this theory, our energy diminishes as we age, and we select (selection) personal goals to get the
most (optimize) for the effort we put into activities, in this way making up for (compensation) the loss of a
13.4 • Theoretical Perspectives on Aging

wider range of goals and activities. In this theory, the physical decline postulated by disengagement theory
may result in more dependence, but that is not necessarily negative, as it allows aging individuals to save their
energy for the most meaningful activities. For example, a professor who values teaching sociology may
participate in a phased retirement, never entirely giving up teaching, but acknowledging personal physical
limitations that allow teaching only one or two classes per year.
Swedish sociologist Lars Tornstam developed a symbolic interactionist theory called gerotranscendence: the
idea that as people age, they transcend the limited views of life they held in earlier times. Tornstam believes
that throughout the aging process, the elderly become less self-centered and feel more peaceful and connected
to the natural world. Wisdom comes to the elderly, Tornstam’s theory states, and as the elderly tolerate
ambiguities and seeming contradictions, they let go of conflict and develop softer views of right and wrong
(Tornstam 2005).
Tornstam does not claim that everyone will achieve wisdom in aging. Some elderly people might still grow
bitter and isolated, feel ignored and left out, or become grumpy and judgmental. Symbolic interactionists
believe that, just as in other phases of life, individuals must struggle to overcome their own failings and turn
them into strengths.
13 • Aging and the Elderly

Key Terms
activity theory
a theory which suggests that for individuals to enjoy old age and feel satisfied, they must
maintain activities and find a replacement for the statuses and associated roles they have left behind as
they aged
age stratification theory
a theory which states that members of society are stratified by age, just as they are
stratified by race, class, and gender
ageism
discrimination based on age
baby Boomers
people in the United States born between approximately 1946 and 1964
centenarians
people 100 years old or older
cohort
a group of people who share a statistical or demographic trait
continuity theory
a theory which states that the elderly make specific choices to maintain consistency in
internal (personality structure, beliefs) and external structures (relationships), remaining active and
involved throughout their elder years
dependency ratio
the number of nonproductive citizens (young, disabled, elderly) to productive working
citizens
disengagement theory
a theory which suggests that withdrawing from society and social relationships is a
natural part of growing old
elder abuse
the act of a caretaker intentionally depriving an older person of care or harming the person in
their charge
exchange theory
a theory which suggests that we experience an increased dependence as we age and must
increasingly submit to the will of others, because we have fewer ways of compelling others to submit to us
filial piety
deference and respect to one’s parents and ancestors in all things
geriatrics
a medical specialty focusing on the elderly
gerontocracy
a type of social structure wherein the power is held by a society’s oldest members
gerontology
a field of science that seeks to understand the process of aging and the challenges encountered
as seniors grow older
gerotranscendence
the idea that as people age, they transcend limited views of life they held in earlier
times
grief
a psychological, emotional, and social response to the feelings of loss that accompanies death or a
similar event
hospice
healthcare that treats terminally ill people by providing comfort during the dying process
life course
the period from birth to death, including a sequence of predictable life events
life expectancy
the number of years a newborn is expected to live
modernization theory
a theory which suggests that the primary cause of the elderly losing power and
influence in society are the parallel forces of industrialization and modernization
physician-assisted suicide
the voluntary use of lethal medication provided by a medical doctor to end
one’s life
primary aging
biological factors such as molecular and cellular changes
secondary aging
aging that occurs due to controllable factors like exercise and diet
selective optimization with compensation theory
a theory based on the idea that successful personal
development throughout the life course and subsequent mastery of the challenges associated with
everyday life are based on the components of selection, optimization, and compensation
senescence
the aging process, including biological, intellectual, emotional, social, and spiritual changes
social gerontology
a specialized field of gerontology that examines the social (and sociological) aspects of
aging
subculture of aging theory
a theory that focuses on the shared community created by the elderly when
they are excluded (due to age), voluntarily or involuntarily, from participating in other groups
supercentenarians
people 110 of age or older
thanatology
the systematic study of death and dying
13 • Key Terms

Section Summary
13.1 Who Are the Elderly? Aging in Society
The social study of aging uses population data and cohorts to predict social concerns related to aging
populations. In the United States, the population is increasingly older (called “the graying of the United
States”), especially due to the baby Boomer segment. Global studies on aging reveal a difference in life
expectancy between core and peripheral nations as well as a discrepancy in nations’ preparedness for the
challenges of increasing elderly populations.
13.2 The Process of Aging
Old age affects every aspect of human life: biological, social, and psychological. Although medical technology
has lengthened life expectancies, it cannot eradicate aging and death. Cultural attitudes shape the way our
society views old age and dying, but these attitudes shift and evolve over time.
13.3 Challenges Facing the Elderly
As people enter old age, they face challenges. Ageism, which involves stereotyping and discrimination against
the elderly, leads to misconceptions about their abilities. Although elderly poverty has been improving for
decades, many older people may be detrimentally affected by the 2008 recession. Some elderly people grow
physically frail and, therefore, dependent on caregivers, which increases their risk of elder abuse.
13.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Aging
The three major sociological perspectives inform the theories of aging. Theories in the functionalist
perspective focus on the role of elders in terms of the functioning of society as a whole. Theories in the conflict
perspective concentrate on how elders, as a group, are at odds with other groups in society. And theories in the
symbolic interactionist perspective focus on how elders’ identities are created through their interactions.
Section Quiz
13.1 Who Are the Elderly? Aging in Society
1. In most countries, elderly women ______ than elderly men.
a.
are mistreated less
b.
live a few years longer
c.
suffer fewer health problems
d.
deal with issues of aging better
2. America’s baby Boomer generation has contributed to all of the following except:
a.
Social Security’s vulnerability
b.
improved medical technology
c.
Medicaid being in danger of going bankrupt
d.
rising Medicare budgets
3. The measure that compares the number of men to women in a population is ______.
a.
cohort
b.
sex ratio
c.
baby Boomer
d.
disengagement
13 • Section Summary

4. The “graying of the United States” refers to ________.
a.
the increasing percentage of the population over sixty-five years old
b.
faster aging due to stress
c.
dissatisfaction with retirement plans
d.
increased health problems such as Alzheimer’s
5. What is the approximate median age of the United States?
a.
eighty-five
b.
sixty-five
c.
thirty-seven
d.
eighteen
13.2 The Process of Aging
6. Thanatology is the study of _____.
a.
life expectancy
b.
biological aging
c.
death and dying
d.
adulthood
7. In Erik Erikson’s developmental stages of life, with which challenge must older people struggle?
a.
Overcoming despair to achieve integrity
b.
Overcoming role confusion to achieve identity
c.
Overcoming isolation to achieve intimacy
d.
Overcoming shame to achieve autonomy
8. Who wrote the book On Death and Dying, outlining the five stages of grief?
a.
Ignatz Nascher
b.
Erik Erikson
c.
Elisabeth Kübler-Ross
d.
Carol Gilligan
9. For individual people of a certain culture, the life course is ________.
a.
the average age they will die
b.
the lessons they must learn
c.
the length of a typical bereavement period
d.
the typical sequence of events in their lives
10. In the United States, life expectancy rates in recent decades have ______.
a.
continued to gradually rise
b.
gone up and down due to global issues such as military conflicts
c.
lowered as healthcare improves
d.
stayed the same since the mid-1960s
13.3 Challenges Facing the Elderly
11. Today in the United States the poverty rate of the elderly is ______.
a.
lower than at any point in history
b.
increasing
c.
decreasing
d.
the same as that of the general population
13 • Section Quiz

12. Which action reflects ageism?
a.
Enabling WWII veterans to visit war memorials
b.
Speaking slowly and loudly when talking to someone over age sixty-five years old
c.
Believing that older people drive too slowly
d.
Living in a culture where elders are respected
13. Which factor most increases the risk of an elderly person suffering mistreatment?
a.
Bereavement due to widowhood
b.
Having been abusive as a younger adult
c.
Being frail to the point of dependency on care
d.
The ability to bestow a large inheritance on survivors
14. If elderly people suffer abuse, it is most often perpetrated by ______.
a.
spouses
b.
caregivers
c.
lawyers
d.
strangers
15. Veterans are two to four times more likely to ______ as people who did not serve in the military.
a.
be a victim of elder abuse
b.
commit suicide
c.
be concerned about financial stresses
d.
be abusive toward care providers
13.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Aging
16. Which assertion about aging in men would be made by a sociologist following the functionalist
perspective?
a.
Men view balding as representative of a loss of strength.
b.
Men tend to have better retirement plans than women.
c.
Men have life expectancies three to five years shorter than women.
d.
Men who remain active after retirement play supportive community roles.
17. An older woman retires and completely changes her life. She is no longer raising children or working.
However, she joins the YWCA to swim every day. She serves on the Friends of the Library board. She is
part of a neighborhood group that plays Bunco on Saturday nights. Her situation most closely illustrates
the ______ theory.
a.
activity
b.
continuity
c.
disengagement
d.
gerotranscendence
18. An older man retires from his job, stops golfing, and cancels his newspaper subscription. After his wife
dies, he lives alone, loses touch with his children, and stops seeing old friends. His situation most closely
illustrates the _______ theory.
a.
activity
b.
continuity
c.
disengagement
d.
gerotranscendence
13 • Section Quiz

19. What is the primary driver of modernization theory?
a.
Industrialization
b.
Aging
c.
Conflict
d.
Interactions
20. The Age Discrimination in Employment Act counteracts which theory?
a.
Modernization
b.
Conflict
c.
Disengagement
d.
Age stratification
Short Answer
13.1 Who Are the Elderly? Aging in Society
1. Baby Boomers have been called the “Me Generation.” Do you know any baby Boomers? In what way do they
exemplify their generation?
2. What social issues involve age disaggregation (breakdowns into groups) of a population? What kind of
sociological studies would consider age an important factor?
3. Conduct a mini-census by counting the members of your extended family, and emphasize age. Try to
include three or four generations, if possible. Create a table and include total population plus percentages
of each generation. Next, begin to analyze age patterns in your family. What issues are important and
specific to each group? What trends can you predict about your own family over the next ten years based on
this census? For example, how will family members’ needs and interests and relationships change the
family dynamic?
13.2 The Process of Aging
4. Test Elisabeth Kübler-Ross’s five stages of grief. Think of someone or something you have lost. You might
consider the loss of a relationship, possession, or aspect of your self-identity. For example, perhaps you
dissolved a childhood friendship, sold your car, or got a bad haircut. For even a small loss, did you
experience all five stages of grief? If so, how did the expression of each stage manifest? Did the process
happen slowly or rapidly? Did the stages occur out of order? Did you reach acceptance? Try to recall the
experience and analyze your own response to loss. Does your experience facilitate your empathizing with
the elderly?
5. What do you think it will be like to be ten, twenty, and fifty years older than you are now? What facts are
your assumptions based on? Are any of your assumptions about getting older false? What kind of
sociological study could you establish to test your assumptions?
6. What is your relationship to aging and to time? Look back on your own life. How much and in what ways did
you change in ten years and in twenty years? Does a decade seem like a long time or a short time in a life
span? Now apply some of your ideas to the idea of aging. Do you think older people share similar
experiences as they age?
13.3 Challenges Facing the Elderly
7. Make a list of all the biases, generalizations, and stereotypes about elderly people that you have seen or
heard. Include everything, no matter how small or seemingly trivial. Try to rate the items on your list.
Which statements can be considered myths? Which frequently turn into discrimination?
8. Have you known any person who experienced prejudice or discrimination based on age? Think of someone
who has been denied an experience or opportunity simply for being too old. Write the story as a case study.
13 • Short Answer

9. Think of an older person you know well, perhaps a grandparent, other relative, or neighbor. How does this
person defy certain stereotypes of aging?
10. Older people suffer discrimination, and often, so do teenagers. Compare the discrimination of the elderly
to that of teenagers. What do the groups share in common and how are they different?
13.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Aging
11. Remember Madame Jeanne Calment of France was the world's oldest living person until she died at 122
years old? Consider her life experiences from all three sociological points of view. Analyze her situation as
if you were a functionalist, a symbolic interactionist, and a conflict theorist.
12. Which lifestyle do you think is healthiest for aging people—activity, continuity, or disengagement theories?
What are the pros and cons of each theory? Find examples of real people who illustrate the theories, either
from your own experience or your friends’ relationships with older people. Do your examples show
positive or negative aspects of the theory they illustrate?
Further Research
13.1 Who Are the Elderly? Aging in Society
Gregory Bator founded the television show Graceful Aging and then developed a web site offering short video
clips from the show. The purpose of Graceful Aging is to both inform and entertain, with clips on topics such
as sleep, driving, health, safety, and legal issues. Bator, a lawyer, works on counseling seniors about their
legal needs. Log onto Graceful Aging (http://openstax.org/l/graceful_aging) for a visual understanding of
aging.
13.2 The Process of Aging
Read the article “A Study of Sexuality and Health among Older Adults in the United States”
(http://openstax.org/l/New_England_journal_medicine) .
13.3 Challenges Facing the Elderly
Veterans who served in the U.S. Armed Forces during various conflicts represent cohorts. Veterans share
certain aspects of life in common. To find information on veteran populations and how they are aging, study
the information on the web site of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (http://openstax.org/l/
Dep_Veterans_Affairs) .
Learn more about the Honor Flight Network (http://openstax.org/l/honor_flight) , the organization offering
trips to national war memorials in Washington, DC, at no cost to the veterans.
13.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Aging
New Dynamics of Aging is a web site produced by an interdisciplinary team at the University of Sheffield. It is
supposedly the largest research program on aging in the United Kingdom to date. In studying the
experiences of aging and factors that shape aging, including behaviors, biology, health, culture, history,
economics, and technology, researchers are promoting healthy aging and helping dispel stereotypes. Learn
more by logging onto it's website here (http://openstax.org/l/new_dynamics_aging) .
References
Introduction
Boston University School of Medicine. 2014. “New England Centenarian Study Overview.” Retrieved November
2, 2014 (http://www.bumc.bu.edu/centenarian/overview/).
Diebel, Matthew. 2014. “Yes, Six People Born in the 19th Century Are Still With Us.” USA Today. Retrieved
November 2, 2014 (http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2014/09/05/six-people-still-alive-who-
13 • Further Research

were-born-in-the-19th-century/15122367/).
Gerontology Research Group. 2014. “Current Validated Living Supercentenarians.” Retrieved November 2,
2014 (http://www.grg.org/Adams/E.HTM).
United States Census Bureau. 2011. “Census Bureau Releases Comprehensive Analysis of Fast-Growing
90-and0Older Population.” Newsroom Archive, November 17. Retrieved November 1, 2014
(https://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/aging_population/cb11-194.html).
13.1 Who Are the Elderly? Aging in Society
Bannister, Judith, David E. Bloom, and Larry Rosenberg. 2010. Population Aging and Economic Growth in
China. Cambridge, MA: The Program on the Global Demography of Aging.
Bartram, L., and B. Roe. 2005. “Dependency Ratios: Useful Policy-Making Tools?” Geriatrics & Gerontology
International 5:224–228.
Bierman, Libby. 2011. “The Baby Boom = The BIG Boom in Healthcare.” Forbes, July 22. Retrieved January 31,
2012 (http://www.forbes.com/sites/sageworks/2011/07/22/the-baby-boom-the-big-boom-in-healthcare/).
Bookman, Ann, and Delia Kimbrel. 2011. “Families and Elder Care in the Twenty-First Century.” The Future of
Children 21:117–140.
Bostrom, Josh. 2005. “Aging Baby Boomers Will Drive Health-Care Innovation.” Infoworld. Retrieved January
31, 2012 (http://www.infoworld.com/t/business/aging-baby-Boomers-will-drive-health-care-
innovation-054).
Cohn, D'Vera and Passel, Jeffrey S. 2018. “A Record 64 Million Americans Live in Multigenerational
Households.” Pew Research Center. (https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/04/05/a-
record-64-million-americans-live-in-multigenerational-households/)
Congressional Budget Office. 2008. “Long-Term Outlook for Medicare, Medicaid and Total Health Care
Spending.” Retrieved January 31, 2012 (http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/102xx/doc10297/Chapter2.5.1.shtml).
Emling, Shelley. 2017. (“The Age At Which You Are Officially Old.”) AARP. (https://www.aarp.org/home-family/
friends-family/info-2017/what-age-are-you-old-fd.html)
Farrel, Diana, David Court, Eric Beinhocker, John Forsyth, Ezra Greenberg, Suruchi Shukla, Jonathan Ablett,
and Geoffrey Greene. 2008. Talkin' 'Bout My Generation: The Economic Impact of Aging US Baby Boomers.
McKinsey Global Institute. Retrieved February 12, 2012 (http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/Research/
Americas/Talkin_bout_my_generation).
Gerontological Society of America. 2008. “Baby Boomer Health Care Crisis Looms.” Science Daily, April 17.
Retrieved January 31, 2012 (http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/04/080417111300.htm).
Gilleard, Chris, and Paul Higgs. 2007. “The Third Age and the Baby Boomers: Two Approaches to the Social
Structuring of Later Life.” International Journal of Ageing and Later Life 2(2):13–30.
Graham, Judith. 2021. “Older Adults Without Family or Friends Lag in Race to Get Vaccines.” KHN.
(https://khn.org/news/article/older-adults-without-family-or-friends-lag-in-race-to-get-vaccines/)
Hamilton, Gary. 1990. “Patriarchy, Patrimonialism, and Filial Piety: A Comparison of China and Western
Europe.” British Journal of Sociology 41:77–104.
Hashimoto, Akiko. 1996. The Gift of Generations: Japanese and American Perspectives on Aging and the Social
Contract. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hobbs, Frank. 1994. “The Elderly Population.” Population Profile of the United States. Retrieved January 28,
2012 (http://www.census.gov/population/www/pop-profile/elderpop.html).
13 • References

Hsu, Francis. 1971. “Filial Piety in Japan and China: Borrowing, Variation and Significance.” Journal of
Comparative Family Studies 2:67–74.
Lee, Mary. 2009. “Trends in Global Population Growth.” Research Starters Sociology: Academic Topic
Overview. Retrieved January 28, 2012 from (http://www.ebscohost.com/academic/academic-search-
premier).
Levy, Becca R., Martin D. Slade, Suzanne R. Kunkel, and Stanislav V. Kasl, 2002. “Longevity Increased by
Positive Self-perceptions of Aging.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 83(2):261–270.
Logan, J.R., R. Ward, and G. Spitze. 1992. “As Old as You Feel: Age Identity in Middle and Later Life.”
Sociological Forces 71:451–67.
Macunovich, Diane J. 2000. The Baby Boomers. New York: Barnard College Department of Economics.
Mujahid, G. 2006. “Population Ageing in East and South-East Asia: Current Situation and Emerging
Challenges.” Papers in Population Ageing No.1. New York: United Nations Population Fund. Retrieved
January 28, 2012 (http://www.eldis.org/assets/Docs/23355.html).
Native News Network. 2011. “Age Distribution: AIAN Compared to Total US.” Retrieved January 22, 2012
(http://www.nativenewsnetwork.com/native-youth-count.html).
Ogawa, Naohiro, and Robert Retherford. 1993. “Care of the Elderly in Japan: Changing Norms and
Expectations.” Journal of Marriage and the Family 55:585–597.
Pew Research Center. 2010. “The Return of the Multi-Generational Family Household.” Pew Research Social &
Demographic Trends; Section I. Retrieved November 1, 2014 (http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2010/03/18/
the-return-of-the-multi-generational-family-household/).
Population Fund. Retrieved January 28, 2012 (http://www.eldis.org/assets/Docs/23355.html).
Raikhola, Pushkar Singh, and Yasuhiro Kuroki. 2009. “Aging and Elderly Care Practice in Japan: Main Issues,
Policy and Program Perspective; What Lessons Can Be Learned from Japanese Experiences?” Dhaulagiri:
Journal of Sociology & Anthropology 3:41–82.
Reuteman, Rob. 2010. Will Baby Boomers Bankrupt Social Security? Retrieved January 31, 2012
(http://www.cnbc.com/id/34941334/Will_Baby_Boomers_Bankrupt_Social_Security).
Rothbaum, F. 1983. “Aging and Age Stereotypes.” Social Cognition 2:171–84.
Shaw, Gina. “Hip and Knee Replacements on the Rise.” Web MD. Retrieved February 13, 2012
(http://arthritis.webmd.com/features/hip-knee-replacements-rise).
Sweetser, Dorian Apple. 1984. “Love and Work: Intergenerational Household Composition in the U. S. in 1900.”
Journal of Marriage and the Family 46(2):289–293.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2013. “State and County Facts: USA Quick Facts.” US Census Bureau. Retrieved November
1, 2014 (http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/00000.html).
U.S. Census Bureau. 2011a. “Age and Sex Composition 2010.” 2010 Census Briefs, May. Retrieved February 13,
2012 (http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-03.pdf).
U.S. Census Bureau. 2011b. “The Older Population: 2010.” 2010 Census Briefs, November. Retrieved December
13, 2011 (http://0-www.census.gov.iii-server.ualr.edu/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-09.pdf).
U.S. Census Bureau. 2011c. “Population.” The 2012 Statistical Abstract. Retrieved January 28, 2012
(http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/cats/population.html).
U.S. Census Bureau. 2018. “The Population 65 Years and Older.” (https://www.census.gov/library/
visualizations/interactive/population-65-years.html)
13 • References

Werner, Carrie. 2011. “The Older Population: 2010.” U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved January 28, 2012
(http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-09.pdf).
Wiencaw, Ruth. 2009. “Caring for the Elderly in America.” Research Starters. Retrieved January 28, 2012
(http://www.ebscohost.com/academic/academic-search-premier).
World Health Organization. 2012. “Definition of an Older or Elderly Person.” Retrieved January 28, 2012
(http://www.who.int/healthinfo/survey/ageingdefnolder/en/index.html).
Xuequan, Mu. 2011. “Premier Wen Join Nursing Home Seniors to Celebrate Mid-Autumn Festival.” Retrieved
February 12, 2012 (http://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/china/2011-09/13/c_131134367.htm).
Yap, Mui Teng, Leng Leng Thang, and John W. Traphagan. 2005. “Introduction: Aging in Asia—Perennial
Concerns on Support and Caring for the Old.” Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology 20:257–267.
Zelenev, Sergei. 2008. “Regional Dimensions of the Ageing Situation.” The United Nations. Retrieved January
28, 2012 (http://social.un.org/index/Ageing/Resources/PapersandPublications.aspx).
13.2 The Process of Aging
Administration on Aging. 2011. “A Profile of Older Americans 2010.” Retrieved January 29, 2012
(http://www.aoa.gov/AoARoot/Aging_Statistics/Profile/2010/14.aspx).
AGS. 2021. “Geriatrics Workforce By The Numbers (Updated 2021). American Geriatrics Society.
(https://www.americangeriatrics.org/geriatrics-profession/about-geriatrics/geriatrics-workforce-numbers)
Bazzini, D.G., and W.D. Mclntosh. 1997. "The Aging Women in Popular Film: Underrepresented, Unattractive,
Unfriendly, and Unintelligent." Sex Roles 36:531–43.
Bryant, Ed. 2004. “Male and Female Sexual Dysfunction.” Voice of the Diabetic 19(1). Retrieved January 29,
2012 (http://www.nfb.org/nfb/diabetic_sexual_dysfunction.asp?SnID=963479200).
Clarfield, A. Mark. 1990. “Dr. Ignatz Nascher and the Birth of Geriatrics.” Canadian Medical Association Journal
143(9):944–945, 948.
Cole, Thomas R. 1993. The Journey of Life: a Cultural History of Aging in America. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Crimmins, Eileen. 2004. “Trends in the Health of the Elderly.” Annual Review of Public Health 25:79–98.
Davidson, Kate. 2002. “Gender Differences in New Partnership Choices and Constraints for Older Widows and
Widowers.” Ageing International 27: 43–60.
Drummond, Murray. 1998. “Sports, Aging Men, and Constructions of Masculinity.” Generations 32:32–35.
Erikson, Erik H. 1963 [1950]. Childhood and Society. New York: Norton.
Fredriksen-Goldsen, K.I., H.J. Kim, C.A. Emlet, A. Muraco, E.A. Erosheva, C.P. Hoy-Ellis, J. Goldsen, and H.
Petry. 2011. The Aging and Health Report: Disparities and Resilience among Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender Older Adults. Seattle, WA: Institute for Multigenerational Health. Retrieved January 29, 2012
(http://caringandaging.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/Full-Report-FINAL.pdf).
Grant, Jaime M. 2009. “Outing Age 2010: Public Policy Issues Affecting Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and
Transgender (LGBT) Elders.” National Gay and Lesbian Task Force Policy Institute. Washington, DC.
Retrieved January 29, 2012 (http://www.thetaskforce.org/downloads/reports/reports/outingage_final.pdf).
Gravier, Elizabeth. 2021. “Experts say you should have 10 times your income saved to retire by age 67—here’s
what to do if you aren’t yet there.” CNBC. (https://www.cnbc.com/select/what-to-do-if-you-havent-saved-
enough-for-retirement/)
13 • References

Hagestad, Gunhild, and Peter Uhlenberg. 2006. “Should We Be Concerned about Age Segregation?” Research
on Aging 28:638–653.
Harold and Maude. N.d. Retrieved February 1, 2012 (http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0067185/).
Hillman, Jennifer. 2011. “A Call for an Integrated Biopsychosocial Model to Address Fundamental Disconnects
in an Emergent Field: An Introduction to the Special Issue on 'Sexuality and Aging'.” Aging International
36:303–312.
Hospice Foundation of America. 2012a. “Welcome.” Retrieved February 13, 2012
(http://register.hospicefoundation.org/welcome).
Hospice Foundation of America. 2012b. “What Is Hospice?” Retrieved January 29, 2012
(http://www.hospicefoundation.org/whatishospice).
Jenkins D., C. Walker, H. Cohen, and L. Curry. 2010. “A Lesbian Older Adult Managing Identity Disclosure: A
Case Study.” Journal of Gerontological Social Work 53:402–420.
Karantzas, Gery. 2018. “Mind the Gap: Does Age Difference in Relationships Matter.” The Conversation.
(https://theconversation.com/mind-the-gap-does-age-difference-in-relationships-matter-94132)
Lindau, Stacy Tessler, M.D., L. Philip Schumm, Edward O. Laumann, Wendy Levinson, Colm A.
O'Muircheartaigh, and Linda J. Waite. 2007. “A Study of Sexuality and Health among Older Adults in the
United States.” New England Journal of Medicine 357:762–774.
Lloyd, Liz, Kate White, and Eileen Sutton. 2011. “Researching the End-of-Life in Old Age: Cultural, Ethical and
Methodological Issues.” Aging &Society 31:386–407.
Marshall, B., and S. Katz. 2002. “Forever Functional: Sexual Fitness and the Aging Male Body.” Body and
Society 8:43–70.
MetLife Mature Market Institute. 2010. “Still Out, Still Aging: The Met Life Study of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender Baby Boomers.” Retrieved January 29, 2012 (http://www.metlife.com/assets/cao/mmi/
publications/studies/2010/mmi-still-out-still-aging.pdf).
Munch, S. 2004. "Gender-Biased Diagnosing of Women's Medical Complaints: Contributions of Feminist
Thought, 1970-1995." Women & Health 40:101–121.
Munnell, Alice. 2011. “What Is the Average Retirement Age?” Center for Retirement Research. Retrieved
January 29, 2012 (http://crr.bc.edu/briefs/what_is_the_average_retirement_age.html).
National Senior Citizens Law Center. 2011. “LGTB Older Adults in Long-Term Care Facilities: Stories from the
Field.” Retrieved January 30, 2012 (http://www.lgbtlongtermcare.org/).
Nonacs, Ruta. 2018. “Female Sexual Dysfunction: New Treatments on the Way.” MGH Center for Women's
Mental Health. (https://womensmentalhealth.org/posts/female-sexual-dysfunction-new-treatments-on-the-
way/)
Packer, Dominic and Alison Chasteen. 2006. “Looking Towards the Future: How Possible Aged Selves Influence
Prejudice Towards Older Adults.” Social Cognition 24:218–247.
Parker, Marti and Thorslund Mats. 2007. “Health Trends in the Elderly Population: Getting Better and Getting
Worse.” The Gerontologist 47:150–158.
Pleis, J.R., J.W. Lucas, and B.W. Wared. 2009. “Summary Health Statistics for U.S. Adults: National Health
Interview Survey, 2008.” Data from the National Health Survey, Series 10. No. 242.
Riley, Matilda White. 1978. “Aging, Social Change, and the Power of Ideas.” Daedalus 107:39–52.
Sharpe, P.A. 1995. “Older Women and Health Services: Moving from Ageism Toward Empowerment.” Women &
13 • References

Health 22:9–23.
Spector-Mersel, Gabriela. 2006. “Never-Aging Stories: Western Hegemonic Masculinity Scripts.” Journal of
Gender Studies 15:67–82.
United Nations. 2020. “World Population Aging, 2019 Highlights.” United Nations. (https://www.un.org/en/
development/desa/population/publications/pdf/ageing/WorldPopulationAgeing2019-Highlights.pdf
Whitbourne, Susan and Stacey Whitbourne. 2010. Adult Development and Aging: Biopsychosocial
Perspectives. 4th ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
13.3 Challenges Facing the Elderly
Acierno, R., Melba A. Hernandez, Ananda B. Amstadter, Heidi S. Resnick, Kenneth Steve, Wendy Muzzy, and
Dean G. Kilpatrick. 2010. “Prevalence and Correlates of Emotional, Physical, Sexual, Financial Abuse and
Potential Neglect in the United States.” American Journal of Public Health 100:292–7.
Administration on Aging. 2009. “Data Sources on the Impact of the 2008 Financial Crisis on the Economic
Well-being of Older Americans Aging Forum Report Issue #1.” Retrieved February 13, 2012
(http://www.agingstats.gov/Main_Site/docs/DSOA_Aging_Brief.pdf).
Brownell, Patricia. 2010. “Social Issues and Social Policy Response to Abuse and Neglect of Older Adults.” Pp.
1–16 in Aging, Ageism and Abuse: Moving from Awareness to Action, edited by G. Gutman and C. Spencer.
Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Elsevier.
Glantz, Aaron. 2010. “Suicide Rates Soar among WWII Vets, Records Show.” The Bay Citizen, November 11.
Retrieved February 27, 2012 (http://www.baycitizen.org/veterans/story/suicide-rates-soar-among-wwii-
vets/comments/#comments).
Honor Flight Network. 2011. Retrieved September 22, 2011 (http://www.honorflight.org/).
Kohn, Robert, and Wendy Verhoek-Oftedahl. 2011. “Caregiving and Elder Abuse.” Medicine & Health Rhode
Island 94(2):47–49.
National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics. 2011. “VA Benefits and Health Care Utilization.”
November 9. Retrieved February 13, 2012 (http://www.va.gov/Vetdata/docs/Quickfacts/
4x6_fall_11_sharepoint_Final.pdf).
National Center of Elder Abuse. 2011. “Major Types of Elder Abuse.” Retrieved January 21, 2012
(http://ncea.aoa.gov/FAQ/Type_Abuse/).
Stuart, Spencer. 2008. “Leading CEOs: A Statistical Snapshot of S&P 500 Leaders.” Retrieved February 13, 2012
(http://content.spencerstuart.com/sswebsite/pdf/lib/2005_CEO_Study_JS.pdf).
Urban Institute and Kaiser Commission. 2010. “Poverty Rate by Age.” Retrieved January 21, 2012
(http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparebar.jsp?ind=10&cat=1").
U.S. Census Bureau. 2009. “Webinar on 2008 Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Estimates from the
Current Population Survey.” Retrieved February 13, 2012 (http://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/
archives/news_conferences/2009-09-10_remarks_johnson.html).
U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs. 2010. “Veteran Population Projections FY 2000 to FY2036.” December.
Retrieved February 13, 2012 (http://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/quickfacts/Population-slideshow.pdf).
13.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Aging
Abner, Carrie. 2006. “Graying Prisons: States Face Challenges of an Aging Inmate Population.” State News,
November/December.
Atchley, R.C. 1971. "Retirement and Leisure Participation: Continuity or Crisis?" The Gerontologist 11:13–17.
13 • References

Atchley, R.C. 1989. "A Continuity Theory of Normal Aging." The Gerontologist 29:183–190.
Baltes, Paul, and Margret Baltes, eds. 1990. Successful Aging: Perspectives from The Behavioral Sciences. New
York: Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge.
Cowgill, D.O. and L.D. Holmes, eds. 1972. Aging and Modernization. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Crosnoe, Robert, and Glen H. Elder. 2002. “Life Course Transitions, the Generational Stake, and Grandparent-
Grandchild Relationships.” Journal of Marriage and Family 64(4):1089–1096.
Cumming, Elaine, and William Earl Henry. 1961. Growing Old. New York: Basic.
Dowd, James J. 1975. "Aging as Exchange: A Preface to Theory." Journal of Gerontology 30:584–594.
Havinghurst, R.J. 1961. "Successful Aging." The Gerontologist 1:8–13.
Havinghurst, Robert, Bernice Neugarten, and Sheldon Tobin. 1968. “Patterns of Aging.” Pp. 161–172 in Middle
Age and Aging, edited by B. Neugarten. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Hothschild, Arlie. 1975. “Disengagement Theory: A Critique and Proposal.” American Sociological Review
40:563–569.
Human Rights Watch. 2012. Old Behind Bars: The Aging Prison Population in the United States. Retrieved
February 2, 2012 (http://www.hrw.org/reports/2012/01/27/old-behind-bars).
Leadership Conference. N.d. “Chapter Three: Race, Sentencing and the “Tough Crime” Movement.” Retrieved
February 2, 2012 (http://www.civilrights.org/publications/justice-on-trial/sentencing.html).
Lemon, B., V. Bengtson, and J. Petersen. 1972. “An Exploration of the Activity Theory of Aging: Activity Types
and Life Expectation among In-Movers to a Retirement Community.” Journal of Gerontology 27:511–23.
Li, Wiehua and Lewis, Nicole. 2020. “This Chart Shows Why the Prison Population Is So Vulnerable to
COVID-19.” The Marshall Project. (https://www.themarshallproject.org/2020/03/19/this-chart-shows-why-
the-prison-population-is-so-vulnerable-to-covid-19)
Reese, Hope. 2019. “What Should We Do About Our Aging Prison Population?” JSTOR Daily.
(https://daily.jstor.org/what-should-we-do-about-our-aging-prison-population/)
Riley, Matilda While, Marilyn Johnson, and Anne Foner. 1972. Aging and Society. Volume III, A Sociology of Age
Stratification. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Rose, Arnold. 1960. “The Subculture of the Aging: A Topic for Sociological Research.” The Gerontologist
2:123–127.
Tornstam Lars. 2005. Gerotranscendence: A Developmental Theory of Positive Aging. New York: Springer
Publishing Company.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2011. Statistical Abstract 2011: Table 147. Retrieved February 13, 2012
(http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/cats/health_nutrition/medicare_medicaid.html).
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 2012. “The Age Discrimination in Employment Act 1967
(ADEA).” Retrieved January 30, 2012 (http://www.eeoc.gov/laws/statutes/adea.cfm).
Warren, Jenifer. 2002. “The Graying of the Prisons.” Los Angeles Times, June 9. Retrieved February 2, 2012
(http://articles.latimes.com/2002/jun/09/local/me-cons9).
13 • References