FIGURE 15.1 Religions come in many forms, such as this large megachurch. (Credit: ToBeDaniel/Wikimedia
Commons)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER OUTLINE
15.1 The Sociological Approach to Religion
15.2 World Religions
15.3 Religion in the United States
Why do sociologists study religion? For centuries, humankind has sought to understand and
explain the “meaning of life.” Many philosophers believe this contemplation and the desire to understand our
place in the universe are what differentiate humankind from other species. Religion, in one form or another,
has been found in all human societies since human societies first appeared. Archaeological digs have revealed
ritual objects, ceremonial burial sites, and other religious artifacts. Social conflict and even wars often result
from religious disputes. To understand a culture, sociologists must study its religion.
What is religion? Pioneer sociologist Émile Durkheim described it with the ethereal statement that it consists
of “things that surpass the limits of our knowledge” (1915). He went on to elaborate: Religion is “a unified
system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things, that is to say set apart and forbidden, beliefs and
practices which unite into one single moral community, called a church, all those who adhere to them” (1915).
Some people associate religion with places of worship (a synagogue or church), others with a practice
(confession or meditation), and still others with a concept that guides their daily lives (like dharma or sin). All
these people can agree that religion is a system of beliefs, values, and practices concerning what a person
holds sacred or considers to be spiritually significant.
Does religion bring fear, wonder, relief, explanation of the unknown or control over freedom and choice? How
do our religious perspectives affect our behavior? These are questions sociologists ask and are reasons they
study religion. What are peoples' conceptions of the profane and the sacred? How do religious ideas affect the
real-world reactions and choices of people in a society?
Religion

Religion can also serve as a filter for examining other issues in society and other components of a culture. For
example, after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and later in during the rise and predominant of the
terrorist group ISIS, it became important for teachers, church leaders, and the media to educate Americans
about Islam to prevent stereotyping and to promote religious tolerance. Sociological tools and methods, such
as surveys, polls, interviews, and analysis of historical data, can be applied to the study of religion in a culture
to help us better understand the role religion plays in people’s lives and the way it influences society.
15.1 The Sociological Approach to Religion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Discuss the historical view of religion from a sociological perspective
•
Describe how the major sociological paradigms view religion
FIGURE 15.2 Universality of religious practice, such as these prayers at the The Umayyad Mosque in Damascus, can
create bonds among people who would otherwise be strangers. Muslim people around the world pray five times
each day while facing the direction of the Kaaba in Mecca (pictured in Section 15.2). Beyond the religious
observance, such a unifying act can build a powerful sense of community. (Credit: Arian Zwegers/flickr).
From the Latin religio (respect for what is sacred) and religare (to bind, in the sense of an obligation), the term
religion describes various systems of belief and practice that define what people consider to be sacred or
spiritual (Fasching and deChant 2001; Durkheim 1915). Throughout history, and in societies across the world,
leaders have used religious narratives, symbols, and traditions in an attempt to give more meaning to life and
understand the universe. Some form of religion is found in every known culture, and it is usually practiced in a
public way by a group. The practice of religion can include feasts and festivals, intercession with God or gods,
marriage and funeral services, music and art, meditation or initiation, sacrifice or service, and other aspects of
culture.
While some people think of religion as something individual because religious beliefs can be highly personal,
religion is also a social institution. Social scientists recognize that religion exists as an organized and
integrated set of beliefs, behaviors, and norms centered on basic social needs and values. Moreover, religion is
a cultural universal found in all social groups. For instance, in every culture, funeral rites are practiced in
15 • Religion

some way, although these customs vary between cultures and within religious affiliations. Despite differences,
there are common elements in a ceremony marking a person’s death, such as announcement of the death, care
of the deceased, disposition, and ceremony or ritual. These universals, and the differences in the way societies
and individuals experience religion, provide rich material for sociological study.
In studying religion, sociologists distinguish between what they term the experience, beliefs, and rituals of a
religion. Religious experience refers to the conviction or sensation that we are connected to “the divine.” This
type of communion might be experienced when people are pray or meditate. Religious beliefs are specific
ideas members of a particular faith hold to be true, such as that Jesus Christ was the son of God, or that
reincarnation exists. Another illustration of religious beliefs is the creation stories we find in different
religions. Religious rituals are behaviors or practices that are either required or expected of the members of a
particular group, such as bar mitzvah or confession of sins (Barkan and Greenwood 2003).
The History of Religion as a Sociological Concept
In the wake of nineteenth century European industrialization and secularization, three social theorists
attempted to examine the relationship between religion and society: Émile Durkheim, Max Weber, and Karl
Marx. They are among the founding thinkers of modern sociology.
As stated earlier, French sociologist Émile Durkheim (1858–1917) defined religion as a “unified system of
beliefs and practices relative to sacred things” (1915). To him, sacred meant extraordinary—something that
inspired wonder and that seemed connected to the concept of “the divine.” Durkheim argued that “religion
happens” in society when there is a separation between the profane (ordinary life) and the sacred (1915). A
rock, for example, isn’t sacred or profane as it exists. But if someone makes it into a headstone, or another
person uses it for landscaping, it takes on different meanings—one sacred, one profane.
Durkheim is generally considered the first sociologist who analyzed religion in terms of its societal impact.
Above all, he believed religion is about community: It binds people together (social cohesion), promotes
behavior consistency (social control), and offers strength during life’s transitions and tragedies (meaning and
purpose). By applying the methods of natural science to the study of society, Durkheim held that the source of
religion and morality is the collective mind-set of society and that the cohesive bonds of social order result
from common values in a society. He contended that these values need to be maintained to maintain social
stability.
But what would happen if religion were to decline? This question led Durkheim to posit that religion is not just
a social creation but something that represents the power of society: When people celebrate sacred things,
they celebrate the power of their society. By this reasoning, even if traditional religion disappeared, society
wouldn’t necessarily dissolve.
Whereas Durkheim saw religion as a source of social stability, German sociologist and political economist Max
Weber (1864–1920) believed it was a precipitator of social change. He examined the effects of religion on
economic activities and noticed that heavily Protestant societies—such as those in the Netherlands, England,
Scotland, and Germany—were the most highly developed capitalist societies and that their most successful
business leaders were Protestant. In his writing The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1905), he
contends that the Protestant work ethic influenced the development of capitalism. Weber noted that certain
kinds of Protestantism supported the pursuit of material gain by motivating believers to work hard, be
successful, and not spend their profits on frivolous things. (The modern use of “work ethic” comes directly
from Weber’s Protestant ethic, although it has now lost its religious connotations.)
15.1 • The Sociological Approach to Religion

The Protestant Work Ethic in the Information Age
Max Weber (1904) posited that, in Europe in his time, Protestants were more likely than Catholics to value
capitalist ideology, and believed in hard work and savings. He showed that Protestant values directly influenced
the rise of capitalism and helped create the modern world order. Weber thought the emphasis on community in
Catholicism versus the emphasis on individual achievement in Protestantism made a difference. His century-old
claim that the Protestant work ethic led to the development of capitalism has been one of the most important
and controversial topics in the sociology of religion. In fact, scholars have found little merit to his contention
when applied to modern society (Greeley 1989).
What does the concept of work ethic mean today? The work ethic in the information age has been affected by
tremendous cultural and social change, just as workers in the mid- to late nineteenth century were influenced by
the wake of the Industrial Revolution. Factory jobs tend to be simple, uninvolved, and require very little thinking
or decision making on the part of the worker. Today, the work ethic of the modern workforce has been
transformed, as more thinking and decision making is required. Employees also seek autonomy and fulfillment in
their jobs, not just wages. Higher levels of education have become necessary, as well as people management
skills and access to the most recent information on any given topic. The information age has increased the rapid
pace of production expected in many jobs.
On the other hand, the “McDonaldization” of the United States (Hightower 1975; Ritzer 1993), in which many
service industries, such as the fast-food industry, have established routinized roles and tasks, has resulted in a
“discouragement” of the work ethic. In jobs where roles and tasks are highly prescribed, workers have no
opportunity to make decisions. They are considered replaceable commodities as opposed to valued employees.
During times of recession, these service jobs may be the only employment possible for younger individuals or
those with low-level skills. The pay, working conditions, and robotic nature of the tasks dehumanizes the workers
and strips them of incentives for doing quality work.
Working hard also doesn’t seem to have any relationship with Catholic or Protestant religious beliefs anymore, or
those of other religions; information age workers expect talent and hard work to be rewarded by material gain
and career advancement.
German philosopher, journalist, and revolutionary socialist Karl Marx (1818–1883) also studied the social
impact of religion. He believed religion reflects the social stratification of society and that it maintains
inequality and perpetuates the status quo. For him, religion was just an extension of working-class (proletariat)
economic suffering. He famously argued that religion “is the opium of the people” (1844).
For Durkheim, Weber, and Marx, who were reacting to the great social and economic upheaval of the late
nineteenth century and early twentieth century in Europe, religion was an integral part of society. For
Durkheim, religion was a force for cohesion that helped bind the members of society to the group, while Weber
believed religion could be understood as something separate from society. Marx considered religion
inseparable from the economy and the worker. Religion could not be understood apart from the capitalist
society that perpetuated inequality. Despite their different views, these social theorists all believed in the
centrality of religion to society.
BIG PICTURE
15 • Religion

Theoretical Perspectives on Religion
FIGURE 15.3 Functionalists believe religion meets many important needs for people, including group cohesion and
companionship. Hindu pilgrims come from far away to Ram Kund, a holy place in the city of Nashik, India. One of the
rituals performed is intended to bring salvation to the souls of people who have passed away. What need is this
practice fulfilling? (Credit: Arian Zwegers/flickr)
Modern-day sociologists often apply one of three major theoretical perspectives. These views offer different
lenses through which to study and understand society: functionalism, symbolic interactionism, and conflict
theory. Let’s explore how scholars applying these paradigms understand religion.
Functionalism
Functionalists contend that religion serves several functions in society. Religion, in fact, depends on society for
its existence, value, and significance, and vice versa. From this perspective, religion serves several purposes,
like providing answers to spiritual mysteries, offering emotional comfort, and creating a place for social
interaction and social control.
In providing answers, religion defines the spiritual world and spiritual forces, including divine beings. For
example, it helps answer questions like, “How was the world created?” “Why do we suffer?” “Is there a plan for
our lives?” and “Is there an afterlife?” As another function, religion provides emotional comfort in times of
crisis. Religious rituals bring order, comfort, and organization through shared familiar symbols and patterns of
behavior.
One of the most important functions of religion, from a functionalist perspective, is the opportunities it creates
for social interaction and the formation of groups. It provides social support and social networking and offers a
place to meet others who hold similar values and a place to seek help (spiritual and material) in times of need.
Moreover, it can foster group cohesion and integration. Because religion can be central to many people’s
concept of themselves, sometimes there is an “in-group” versus “out-group” feeling toward other religions in
our society or within a particular practice. On an extreme level, the Inquisition, the Salem witch trials, and
anti-Semitism are all examples of this dynamic. Finally, religion promotes social control: It reinforces social
norms such as appropriate styles of dress, following the law, and regulating sexual behavior.
Conflict Theory
Conflict theorists view religion as an institution that helps maintain patterns of social inequality. For example,
15.1 • The Sociological Approach to Religion

the Vatican has a tremendous amount of wealth, while the average income of Catholic parishioners is small.
According to this perspective, religion has been used to support the “divine right” of oppressive monarchs and
to justify unequal social structures, like India’s caste system.
Conflict theorists are critical of the way many religions promote the idea that believers should be satisfied with
existing circumstances because they are divinely ordained. This power dynamic has been used by Christian
institutions for centuries to keep poor people poor and to teach them that they shouldn’t be concerned with
what they lack because their “true” reward (from a religious perspective) will come after death. Conflict
theorists also point out that those in power in a religion are often able to dictate practices, rituals, and beliefs
through their interpretation of religious texts or via proclaimed direct communication from the divine.
FIGURE 15.4 Many religions, including the Catholic faith, have long prohibited women from becoming spiritual
leaders. Feminist theorists focus on gender inequality and promote leadership roles for women in religion. (Credit:
Wikimedia Commons)
The feminist perspective is a conflict theory view that focuses specifically on gender inequality. In terms of
religion, feminist theorists assert that, although women are typically the ones to socialize children into a
religion, they have traditionally held very few positions of power within religions. A few religions and religious
denominations are more gender equal, but male dominance remains the norm of most.
Rational Choice Theory: Can Economic Theory Be Applied to Religion?
How do people decide which religion to follow, if any? How does one pick a church or decide which denomination
“fits” best? Rational choice theory (RCT) is one way social scientists have attempted to explain these behaviors. The
theory proposes that people are self-interested, though not necessarily selfish, and that people make rational
choices—choices that can reasonably be expected to maximize positive outcomes while minimizing negative
outcomes. Sociologists Roger Finke and Rodney Stark (1988) first considered the use of RCT to explain some
aspects of religious behavior, with the assumption that there is a basic human need for religion in terms of providing
belief in a supernatural being, a sense of meaning in life, and belief in life after death. Religious explanations of
these concepts are presumed to be more satisfactory than scientific explanations, which may help to account for
the continuation of strong religious connectedness in countries such as the United States, despite predictions of
some competing theories for a great decline in religious affiliation due to modernization and religious pluralism.
Another assumption of RCT is that religious organizations can be viewed in terms of “costs” and “rewards.” Costs
are not only monetary requirements, but are also the time, effort, and commitment demands of any particular
religious organization. Rewards are the intangible benefits in terms of belief and satisfactory explanations about life,
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
15 • Religion

death, and the supernatural, as well as social rewards from membership. RCT proposes that, in a pluralistic society
with many religious options, religious organizations will compete for members, and people will choose between
different churches or denominations in much the same way they select other consumer goods, balancing costs and
rewards in a rational manner. In this framework, RCT also explains the development and decline of churches,
denominations, sects, and even cults; this limited part of the very complex RCT theory is the only aspect well
supported by research data.
Critics of RCT argue that it doesn’t fit well with human spiritual needs, and many sociologists disagree that the costs
and rewards of religion can even be meaningfully measured or that individuals use a rational balancing process
regarding religious affiliation. The theory doesn’t address many aspects of religion that individuals may consider
essential (such as faith) and further fails to account for agnostics and atheists who don’t seem to have a similar
need for religious explanations. Critics also believe this theory overuses economic terminology and structure and
point out that terms such as “rational” and “reward” are unacceptably defined by their use; they would argue that
the theory is based on faulty logic and lacks external, empirical support. A scientific explanation for why something
occurs can’t reasonably be supported by the fact that it does occur. RCT is widely used in economics and to a lesser
extent in criminal justice, but the application of RCT in explaining the religious beliefs and behaviors of people and
societies is still being debated in sociology today.
Symbolic Interactionism
Rising from the concept that our world is socially constructed, symbolic interactionism studies the symbols
and interactions of everyday life. To interactionists, beliefs and experiences are not sacred unless individuals
in a society regard them as sacred. The Star of David in Judaism, the cross in Christianity, and the crescent and
star in Islam are examples of sacred symbols. Interactionists are interested in what these symbols
communicate. Because interactionists study one-on-one, everyday interactions between individuals, a scholar
using this approach might ask questions focused on this dynamic. The interaction between religious leaders
and practitioners, the role of religion in the ordinary components of everyday life, and the ways people express
religious values in social interactions—all might be topics of study to an interactionist.
FIGURE 15.5 The symbols of fourteen religions are depicted here. In no particular order, they represent Judaism,
Wicca, Taoism, Christianity, Confucianism, Baha’i, Druidism, Islam, Hinduism, Zoroastrianism, Shinto, Jainism,
Sikhism, and Buddhism. Can you match the symbol to the religion? What might a symbolic interactionist make of
these symbols? (Credit: ReligiousTolerance.org)
15.1 • The Sociological Approach to Religion

15.2 World Religions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Explain the differences between various types of religious organizations
•
Classify religion, like animism, polytheism, monotheism, and atheism
•
Describe several major world religions
FIGURE 15.6 Cultural traditions may emerge from religious traditions, or may influence them. People from the
same branch of Christianity may celebrate holidays very differently based on where they live. In this image from
Guatemala, women dress as if for a funeral as they play a prominent role in a Holy Week (Semena Santa) procession.
Even in other nearby Central American countries, the procession may look different from this one.
The major religions of the world (Hinduism, Buddhism, Islam, Confucianism, Christianity, Taoism, and
Judaism) differ in many respects, including how each religion is organized and the belief system each upholds.
Other differences include the nature of belief in a higher power, the history of how the world and the religion
began, and the use of sacred texts and objects.
Types of Religious Organizations
Religions organize themselves—their institutions, practitioners, and structures—in a variety of fashions. For
instance, when the Roman Catholic Church emerged, it borrowed many of its organizational principles from
the ancient Roman military and turned senators into cardinals, for example. Sociologists use different terms,
like ecclesia, denomination, and sect, to define these types of organizations. Scholars are also aware that these
definitions are not static. Most religions transition through different organizational phases. For example,
Christianity began as a cult, transformed into a sect, and today exists as an ecclesia.
Cults, like sects, are new religious groups. In the United States today this term often carries pejorative
connotations. However, almost all religions began as cults and gradually progressed to levels of greater size
and organization. The term cult is sometimes used interchangeably with the term new religious movement
(NRM). The new term may be an attempt to lessen the negativity that the term ‘cult’ has amassed.
Controversy exists over whether some groups are cults, perhaps due in part to media sensationalism over
groups like polygamous Mormons or the Peoples Temple followers who died at Jonestown, Guyana. Some
groups that are controversially labeled as cults today include the Church of Scientology and the Hare Krishna
movement.
A sect is a small and relatively new group. Most of the well-known Christian denominations in the United
States today began as sects. For example, the Methodists and Baptists protested against their parent Anglican
15 • Religion

Church in England, just as Henry VIII protested against the Catholic Church by forming the Anglican Church.
From “protest” comes the term Protestant.
Occasionally, a sect is a breakaway group that may be in tension with larger society. They sometimes claim to
be returning to “the fundamentals” or to contest the veracity of a particular doctrine. When membership in a
sect increases over time, it may grow into a denomination. Often a sect begins as an offshoot of a
denomination, when a group of members believes they should separate from the larger group.
Some sects do not grow into denominations. Sociologists call these established sects. Established sects, such
as the Amish or Jehovah’s Witnesses fall halfway between sect and denomination on the ecclesia–cult
continuum because they have a mixture of sect-like and denomination-like characteristics.
A denomination is a large, mainstream religious organization, but it does not claim to be official or state
sponsored. It is one religion among many. For example, Baptist, African Methodist Episcopal, Catholic, and
Seventh-day Adventist are all Christian denominations.
The term ecclesia, originally referring to a political assembly of citizens in ancient Athens, Greece, now refers
to a congregation. In sociology, the term is used to refer to a religious group that most all members of a society
belong to. It is considered a nationally recognized, or official, religion that holds a religious monopoly and is
closely allied with state and secular powers. The United States does not have an ecclesia by this standard; in
fact, this is the type of religious organization that many of the first colonists came to America to escape.
There are many countries in Europe, Asia, Central and South America, and Africa that are considered to have
an official state-church. Most of their citizens share similar beliefs, and the state-church has significant
involvement in national institutions, which includes restricting the behavior of those with different belief
systems. The state-church of England is the Church of England or the Anglican Church established in the 16th
century by King Henry VIII. In Saudi Arabia, Islamic law is enforced, and public display of any other religion is
illegal. Using this definition then, it can be said that the major Abrahamic systems of Christianity, Judaism,
and Islam, are ecclesia; in some regions, they are considered a state-church.
15.2 • World Religions

FIGURE 15.7 How might you classify the Mennonites? As a cult, a sect, or a denomination? (Credit: Frenkieb/flickr)
One way to remember these religious organizational terms is to think of cults, sects, denominations, and
ecclesia representing a continuum, with increasing influence on society, where cults are least influential and
ecclesia are most influential.
Types of Religions
Scholars from a variety of disciplines have strived to classify religions. One widely accepted categorization that
helps people understand different belief systems considers what or who people worship (if anything). Using
this method of classification, religions might fall into one of these basic categories, as shown in Table 15.1.
Religious
Classification
What/Who Is Divine
Example
Polytheism
Multiple gods
Belief systems of the ancient Greeks and
Romans
Monotheism
Single god
Judaism, Islam
Atheism
No deities
Atheism
Animism
Nonhuman beings (animals, plants, natural
world)
Indigenous nature worship (Shinto)
TABLE 15.1 One way scholars have categorized religions is by classifying what or who they hold to be divine.
15 • Religion

Religious
Classification
What/Who Is Divine
Example
Totemism
Human-natural being connection
Ojibwa (Native American) beliefs
TABLE 15.1 One way scholars have categorized religions is by classifying what or who they hold to be divine.
Note that some religions may be practiced—or understood—in various categories. For instance, the Christian
notion of the Holy Trinity (God, Jesus, Holy Spirit) defies the definition of monotheism, which is a religion
based on belief in a single deity, to some scholars. Similarly, many Westerners view the multiple
manifestations of Hinduism’s godhead as polytheistic, which is a religion based on belief in multiple deities,,
while Hindus might describe those manifestations are a monotheistic parallel to the Christian Trinity. Some
Japanese practice Shinto, which follows animism, which is a religion that believes in the divinity of nonhuman
beings, like animals, plants, and objects of the natural world, while people who practice totemism believe in a
divine connection between humans and other natural beings.
It is also important to note that every society also has nonbelievers, such as atheists, who do not believe in a
divine being or entity, and agnostics, who hold that ultimate reality (such as God) is unknowable. While
typically not an organized group, atheists and agnostics represent a significant portion of the population. It is
important to recognize that being a nonbeliever in a divine entity does not mean the individual subscribes to
no morality. Indeed, many Nobel Peace Prize winners and other great humanitarians over the centuries would
have classified themselves as atheists or agnostics.
The World’s Religions and Philosophies
Religions have emerged and developed across the world. Some have been short-lived, while others have
persisted and grown. In this section, we will explore seven of the world’s major religions.
Hinduism
The oldest religion in the world, Hinduism originated in the Indus River Valley about 4,500 years ago in what is
now modern-day northwest India and Pakistan. It arose contemporaneously with ancient Egyptian and
Mesopotamian cultures. With roughly one billion followers, Hinduism is the third-largest of the world’s
religions. Hindus believe in a divine power that can manifest as different entities. Three main
incarnations—Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva—are sometimes compared to the manifestations of the divine in the
Christian Trinity.
Multiple sacred texts, collectively called the Vedas, contain hymns and rituals from ancient India and are
mostly written in Sanskrit. Hindus generally believe in a set of principles called dharma, which refer to one’s
duty in the world that corresponds with “right” actions. Hindus also believe in karma, or the notion that
spiritual ramifications of one’s actions are balanced cyclically in this life or a future life (reincarnation).
Buddhism
Buddhism was founded by Siddhartha Gautama around 500 B.C.E. Siddhartha was said to have given up a
comfortable, upper-class life to follow one of poverty and spiritual devotion. At the age of thirty-five, he
famously meditated under a sacred fig tree and vowed not to rise before he achieved enlightenment (bodhi).
After this experience, he became known as Buddha, or “enlightened one.” Followers were drawn to Buddha’s
teachings and the practice of meditation, and he later established a monastic order.
15.2 • World Religions

FIGURE 15.8 Meditation is an important practice in Buddhism. A Tibetan monk is shown here engaged in solitary
meditation. (Credit: Prince Roy/flickr)
Buddha’s teachings encourage Buddhists to lead a moral life by accepting the four Noble Truths: 1) life is
suffering, 2) suffering arises from attachment to desires, 3) suffering ceases when attachment to desires
ceases, and 4) freedom from suffering is possible by following the “middle way.” The concept of the “middle
way” is central to Buddhist thinking, which encourages people to live in the present and to practice acceptance
of others (Smith 1991). Buddhism also tends to deemphasize the role of a godhead, instead stressing the
importance of personal responsibility (Craig 2002).
Confucianism
Confucianism was developed by Kung Fu-Tzu (Confucius), who lived in the sixth and fifth centuries B.C.E. An
extraordinary teacher, his lessons—which were about self-discipline, respect for authority and tradition, and
jen (the kind treatment of every person)—were collected in a book called the Analects.
Many consider Confucianism more of a philosophy or social system than a religion because it focuses on
sharing wisdom about moral practices but doesn’t involve any type of specific worship; nor does it have formal
objects. In fact, its teachings were developed in context of problems of social anarchy and a near-complete
deterioration of social cohesion. Dissatisfied with the social solutions put forth, Kung Fu-Tzu developed his
own model of religious morality to help guide society (Smith 1991).
Taoism
In Taoism, the purpose of life is inner peace and harmony. Tao is usually translated as “way” or “path.” The
founder of the religion is generally recognized to be a man named Laozi, who lived sometime in the sixth
century B.C.E. in China. Taoist beliefs emphasize the virtues of compassion and moderation.
The central concept of tao can be understood to describe a spiritual reality, the order of the universe, or the
15 • Religion

way of modern life in harmony with the former two. The ying-yang symbol and the concept of polar forces are
central Taoist ideas (Smith 1991). Some scholars have compared this Chinese tradition to its Confucian
counterpart by saying that “whereas Confucianism is concerned with day-to-day rules of conduct, Taoism is
concerned with a more spiritual level of being” (Feng and English 1972).
Judaism
After their Exodus from Egypt in the thirteenth century B.C.E., Jews, a nomadic society, became monotheistic,
worshipping only one God. The Jews’ covenant, or promise of a special relationship with Yahweh (God), is an
important element of Judaism. Abraham, a key figure in the foundation of the Jewish faith, is also recognized
as a foundation of Christianity and Islam, resulting in the three religions and a few others being referred to as
“Abrahamic.” The sacred Jewish text is the Torah, which Christians also follow as the first five books of the
Bible. Talmud refers to a collection of sacred Jewish oral interpretation of the Torah. Jews emphasize moral
behavior and action in this world as opposed to beliefs or personal salvation in the next world. Since Moses
was a leader of the Jewish people when he recorded the Ten Commandments, their culture is interwoven with
that of other religions and of governments who adhere to “Judeo-Christian values.”
Jewish people may identify as an ethnic group as well as a religion (Glauz-Todrank 2014). After numerous
invasions and wars in the Jewish homeland, culminating in the destruction of the Second Temple, Jewish
people relocated to other parts of the world in what is known as the Jewish Diaspora. Large populations settled
in Europe, and eventually migrated to the United States. Though a contemporary Jewish person's ancestors
may hail from Eastern Europe, the Middle East, or the Iberian Peninsula, many identify themselves as people
of Jewish origin, rather than indicating the nation from which their ancestors emigrated (Chervyakov 2010).
Today, Jewish people are the second-largest religious group in the United States (Pew Research Center 2018),
and the United States is also home to the second largest population of Jewish people, with Israel having the
largest.
Islam
Islam is monotheistic religion, and it follows the teaching of the prophet Muhammad, born in Mecca, Saudi
Arabia, in 570 C.E. Muhammad is seen only as a prophet, not as a divine being, and he is believed to be the
messenger of Allah (God), who is divine. The followers of Islam are called Muslims.
Islam means “peace” and “submission.” The sacred text for Muslims is the Qur’an (or Koran). As with
Christianity’s Old Testament, many of the Qur’an stories are shared with the Jewish faith. Divisions exist within
Islam, but all Muslims are guided by five beliefs or practices, often called “pillars”: 1) Allah is the only god, and
Muhammad is his prophet, 2) daily prayer, 3) helping those in poverty, 4) fasting as a spiritual practice, and 5)
pilgrimage to the holy center of Mecca.
About one-fifth of the world’s population identifies as Muslim. While there is a significant concentration of
Muslim people in the Middle East, they span the globe. The most country with the most Muslim people is is
Indonesia, an island country in Southeast Asia. In the United States, Muslim people make up the third-largest
religious group after Christian and Jewish people, and that population is expected to become larger than the
U.S. Jewish population by about 2040 (Pew Research Center 2018).
15.2 • World Religions

FIGURE 15.9 One of the cornerstones of Muslim practice is journeying to the religion’s most sacred place, Mecca.
The cube structure is the Kaaba (also spelled Ka’bah or Kabah). (Credit: Raeky/flickr)
Christianity
Today the largest religion in the world, Christianity began 2,000 years ago in Palestine, with Jesus of Nazareth,
a leader who taught his followers about caritas (charity) or treating others as you would like to be treated
yourself.
The sacred text for Christians is the Bible. While Jews, Christians, and Muslims share many of same historical
religious stories, their beliefs verge. In their shared sacred stories, it is suggested that the son of God—a
messiah—will return to save God’s followers. While Christians believe that he already appeared in the person of
Jesus Christ, Jews and Muslims disagree. While they recognize Christ as an important historical figure, their
traditions don’t believe he’s the son of God, and their faiths see the prophecy of the messiah’s arrival as not yet
fulfilled.
FIGURE 15.10 The renowned Howard Gospel Choir of Howard University is made up of students, alumni, and
community members. It performs on campus and throughout the world, such as this performance in Ukraine.
(Credit: US Embassy Kyiv Ukraine/flickr)
The largest group of Christians in the United States are members of the Protestant religions, including
members of the Baptist, Episcopal, Lutheran, Methodist, Pentecostal, and other churches. However, more
15 • Religion

people identify as Catholic than any one of those individual Protestant religions (Pew Research Center, 2020).
Different Christian groups have variations among their sacred texts. For instance, The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, an established Christian sect, also uses the Book of Mormon, which they believe details
other parts of Christian doctrine and Jesus’ life that aren’t included in the Bible. Similarly, the Catholic Bible
includes the Apocrypha, a collection that, while part of the 1611 King James translation, is no longer included
in Protestant versions of the Bible. Although monotheistic, many Christians describe their god through three
manifestations that they call the Holy Trinity: the father (God), the son (Jesus), and the Holy Spirit. The Holy
Spirit is a term Christians often use to describe religious experience, or how they feel the presence of the
sacred in their lives. One foundation of Christian doctrine is the Ten Commandments, which decry acts
considered sinful, including theft, murder, and adultery.
15.3 Religion in the United States
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Give examples of religion as an agent of social change
•
Describe current U.S. trends including megachurches, stances on LGBTQ rights, and religious identification.
FIGURE 15.11 Religion and religious observance play a key role in every life stage, deepening its emotional and
cognitive connections. Many religions have a ceremony or sacrament to bring infants into the faith, as this Baptism
does for Christians. In Judaism, adolescents transition to adulthood through ceremonies like the Bat Mitzvah or Bar
Mitzvah. And many couples cement their relationship through religious marriage ceremonies, as did these members
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. (Credit: a: John Ragai/flickr; b: Michele Pace/flickr; c: kristin klein/
flickr)
In examining the state of religion in the United States today, we see the complexity of religious life in our
society, plus emerging trends like the rise of the megachurch, secularization, and the role of religion in social
change.
Religion and Social Change
Religion has historically been an impetus for and a barrier against social change. With Gutenberg’s invention
of the printing press, spreading ideas became far easier to share. Many pamphlets for all sorts of interests were
printed, but one of Gutenberg's greatest contributions may have been mass producing the Christian Bible. The
translation of sacred texts into everyday, nonscholarly language empowered people to shape their religions.
However, printers did not just work for the Church. They printed many other texts, including those that were
not aligned with Church doctrine. Martin Luther had his complaints against the Church (the 95 Theses) printed
in 1517, which allowed them to be distributed throughout Europe. His convictions eventually led to the
Protestant Reformation, which revolutionized not only the Church, but much of Western civilization.
Disagreements between religious groups and instances of religious persecution have led to wars and
genocides. The United States is no stranger to religion as an agent of social change. In fact, many of the United
States' early European arrivals were acting largely on religious convictions when they were driven to settle in
the United States.
15.3 • Religion in the United States

Liberation Theology
Liberation theology began as a movement within the Roman Catholic Church in the 1950s and 1960s in Latin
America, and it combines Christian principles with political activism. It uses the church to promote social
change via the political arena, and it is most often seen in attempts to reduce or eliminate social injustice,
discrimination, and poverty. A list of proponents of this kind of social justice (although some pre-date
liberation theory) could include Francis of Assisi, Leo Tolstoy, Martin Luther King Jr., and Desmond Tutu.
Although begun as a moral reaction against the poverty caused by social injustice in that part of the world,
today liberation theology is an international movement that encompasses many churches and denominations.
Liberation theologians discuss theology from the point of view of the poor and the oppressed, and some
interpret the scriptures as a call to action against poverty and injustice. In Europe and North America, feminist
theology has emerged from liberation theology as a movement to bring social justice to women.
Religious Leaders and the Rainbow of Gay Pride
What happens when a religious leader officiates a gay marriage against denomination policies? What about when
that same minister defends the action in part by coming out and making her own lesbian relationship known to the
church?
In the case of the Reverend Amy DeLong, it meant a church trial. Some leaders in her denomination assert that
homosexuality is incompatible with their faith, while others feel this type of discrimination has no place in a modern
church (Barrick 2011).
As the LGBTQ community increasingly earns basic civil rights, how will religious communities respond? Many
religious groups have traditionally discounted LGBTQ sexualities as “wrong.” However, these organizations have
moved closer to respecting human rights by, for example, increasingly recognizing women as an equal gender. The
Episcopal Church, a Christian sect comprising about 2.3 million people in the United States, has been far more
welcoming to LGBTQ people. Progressing from a supportive proclamation in 1976, the Episcopal Church in the USA
declared in 2015 that its clergy could preside over and sanction same-sex marriages (HRC 2019). The decision was
not without its detractors, and as recently as 2020 an Episcopal bishop (a senior leader) in upstate New York was
dismissed for prohibiting same-sex marriages in his diocese. (NBC, 2020). Lutheran and Anglican denominations
also support the blessing of same-sex marriages, though they do not necessarily offer them the full recognition of
opposite-sex marriages.
Catholic Church leader Pope Francis has been pushing for a more open church, and some Catholic bishops have
been advocating for a more “gay-friendly” church (McKenna, 2014). For these and some other policies, Pope Francis
has met vocal resistance from Church members and some more conservative bishops, while other Catholic bishops
have supported same-sex marriages.
American Jewish denominations generally recognize and support the blessing of same-sex marriages, and Jewish
rabbis have been supporters of LGBTQ rights from the Civil Rights era. In other religions, such as Hinduism, which
does not have a governing body common to other religions, LGBTQ people are generally welcomed, and the decision
to perform same-sex marriages is at the discretion of individual priests.
Megachurches
A megachurch is a Christian church that has a very large congregation averaging more than 2,000 people who
attend regular weekly services. As of 2009, the largest megachurch in the United States was in Houston Texas,
boasting an average weekly attendance of more than 43,000 (Bogan 2009). Megachurches exist in other parts
of the world, especially in South Korea, Brazil, and several African countries, but the rise of the megachurch in
the United States is a fairly recent phenomenon that has developed primarily in California, Florida, Georgia,
SOCIAL POLICY AND DEBATE
15 • Religion

and Texas.
Since 1970 the number of megachurches in this country has grown from about fifty to more than 1,000, most
of which are attached to the Southern Baptist denomination (Bogan 2009). Approximately six million people
are members of these churches (Bird and Thumma 2011). The architecture of these church buildings often
resembles a sport or concert arena. The church may include jumbotrons (large-screen televisual technology
usually used in sports arenas to show close-up shots of an event). Worship services feature contemporary
music with drums and electric guitars and use state-of-the-art sound equipment. The buildings sometimes
include food courts, sports and recreation facilities, and bookstores. Services such as child care and mental
health counseling are often offered.
Typically, a single, highly charismatic pastor leads the megachurch; at present, most are male. Some
megachurches and their preachers have a huge television presence, and viewers all around the country watch
and respond to their shows and fundraising.
Besides size, U.S. megachurches share other traits, including conservative theology, evangelism, use of
technology and social networking (Facebook, Twitter, podcasts, blogs), hugely charismatic leaders, few
financial struggles, multiple sites, and predominantly white membership. They list their main focuses as youth
activities, community service, and study of the Scripture (Hartford Institute for Religion Research b).
Secularization
Historical sociologists Émile Durkheim, Max Weber, and Karl Marx and psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud
anticipated secularization and claimed that the modernization of society would bring about a decrease in the
influence of religion. Weber believed membership in distinguished clubs would outpace membership in
Protestant sects as a way for people to gain authority or respect.
Conversely, some people suggest secularization is a root cause of many social problems, such as divorce, drug
use, and educational downturn. One-time presidential contender Michele Bachmann even linked Hurricane
Irene and the 2011 earthquake felt in Washington D.C. to politicians’ failure to listen to God (Ward 2011).
Similar statements have been made about Hurricane Harvey being the result of Houston’s progressivism and
for the city electing a lesbian mayor.
While some the United States seems to be increasingly secular, that change is occurring with a concurrent rise
in fundamentalism. Compared to other democratic, industrialized countries, the United States is generally
perceived to be a fairly religious nation. Whereas 65 percent of U.S. adults in a 2009 Gallup survey said religion
was an important part of their daily lives, the numbers were lower in Spain (49 percent), Canada (42 percent),
France (30 percent), the United Kingdom (27 percent), and Sweden (17 percent) (Crabtree and Pelham 2009).
Secularization interests social observers because it entails a pattern of change in a fundamental social
institution. Much has been made about the rising number of people who identify as having no religious
affiliation, which in a 2019 Pew Poll reached a new high of 26 percent, up from 17 percent in 2009 (Pew
Research Center, 2020). But the motivations and meanings of having “no religion” vary significantly. A person
who is a part of a religion may make a difficult decision to formally leave it based on disagreements with the
organization or the tenets of the faith. Other people may simply “drift away,” and decide to no longer identify
themselves as members of a religion. Some people are not raised as a part of a religion, and therefore make a
decision whether or not to join one later in life. And finally, a growing number of people identify as spiritual but
not religious (SBNR) and they may pray, meditate, and even celebrate holidays in ways quite similar to people
affiliated with formal religions; they may also find spirituality through other avenues that range from nature to
martial arts. Sociologists and other social scientists may study these motivations and their impact on aspects
of individuals’ lives, as well as cultural and group implications.
In addition to the identification and change regarding people’s religious affiliation, religious observance is also
interesting. Researchers analyze the depth of involvement in formal institutions, like attending worship, and
15.3 • Religion in the United States

informal or individual practices. As shown in Table 15.2, of the religions surveyed, members of the Jehovah's
Witness religion attend religious services more regularly than members of other religions in the United States.
A number of Protestant religions also have relatively high attendance. Regular attendance at services may play
a role in building social structure and acceptance of new people into the general community.
Religious tradition
At least once a
week
Once or twice a month/a few
times a year
Seldom/
never
Buddhist
18%
50%
31%
Catholic
39%
40%
20%
Evangelical Protestant
58%
30%
12%
Hindu
18%
60%
21%
Historically Black Protestant
53%
36%
10%
Jehovah’s Witness
85%
11%
3%
Jewish
19%
49%
31%
Mainline Protestant
33%
43%
24%
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter
Day Saints
77%
14%
9%
Muslim
45%
31%
22%
Orthodox Christian
31%
54%
15%
Unaffiliated (religious “nones”)
4%
24%
72%
TABLE 15.2 A survey of U.S. adults asked about regularity of religious service attendance. (Credit: Pew Research
Center, 2020)
Thank God for that Touchdown: Separation of Church and State
Imagine three public universities with football games scheduled on Saturday. At University A, a group of students in
the stands who share the same faith decide to form a circle amid the spectators to pray for the team. For fifteen
minutes, people in the circle share their prayers aloud among their group. At University B, the team ahead at
halftime decides to join together in prayer, giving thanks and seeking support from God. This lasts for the first ten
minutes of halftime on the sidelines of the field while spectators watch. At University C, the game program includes,
among its opening moments, two minutes set aside for the team captain to share a prayer of his choosing with the
spectators.
In the tricky area of separation of church and state, which of these actions is allowed and which is forbidden? In our
three fictional scenarios, the last example is against the law while the first two situations are perfectly acceptable.
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
15 • Religion

In the United States, a nation founded on the principles of religious freedom (many settlers were escaping religious
persecution in Europe), how stringently do we adhere to this ideal? How well do we respect people’s right to
practice any belief system of their choosing? The answer just might depend on what religion you practice.
In 2003, for example, a lawsuit escalated in Alabama regarding a monument to the Ten Commandments in a public
building. In response, a poll was conducted by USA Today, CNN, and Gallup. Among the findings: 70 percent of
people approved of a Christian Ten Commandments monument in public, while only 33 percent approved of a
monument to the Islamic Qur’an in the same space. Similarly, survey respondents showed a 64 percent approval of
social programs run by Christian organizations, but only 41 percent approved of the same programs run by Muslim
groups (Newport 2003).
These statistics suggest that, for most people in the United States, freedom of religion is less important than the
religion under discussion. And this is precisely the point made by those who argue for separation of church and
state. According to their contention, any state-sanctioned recognition of religion suggests endorsement of one belief
system at the expense of all others—contradictory to the idea of freedom of religion.
So what violates separation of church and state and what is acceptable? Myriad lawsuits continue to test the
answer. In the case of the three fictional examples above, the issue of spontaneity is key, as is the existence (or lack
thereof) of planning on the part of event organizers.
The next time you’re at a state event—political, public school, community—and the topic of religion comes up,
consider where it falls in this debate.
15.3 • Religion in the United States

Key Terms
animism
the religion that believes in the divinity of nonhuman beings, like animals, plants, and objects of
the natural world
atheism
the belief in no deities
cults
religious groups that are small, secretive, and highly controlling of members and have a charismatic
leader
denomination
a large, mainstream religion that is not sponsored by the state
ecclesia
a religion that is considered the state religion
established sects
sects that last but do not become denominations
liberation theology
the use of a church to promote social change via the political arena
megachurch
a Christian church that has a very large congregation averaging more than 2,000 people who
attend regular weekly services
monotheism
a religion based on belief in a single deity
polytheism
a religion based on belief in multiple deities
religion
a system of beliefs, values, and practices concerning what a person holds to be sacred or spiritually
significant
religious beliefs
specific ideas that members of a particular faith hold to be true
religious experience
the conviction or sensation that one is connected to “the divine”
religious rituals
behaviors or practices that are either required for or expected of the members of a
particular group
sect
a small, new offshoot of a denomination
totemism
the belief in a divine connection between humans and other natural beings
Section Summary
15.1 The Sociological Approach to Religion
Religion describes the beliefs, values, and practices related to sacred or spiritual concerns. Social theorist
Émile Durkheim defined religion as a “unified system of beliefs and practices relative to sacred things” (1915).
Max Weber believed religion could be a force for social change. Karl Marx viewed religion as a tool used by
capitalist societies to perpetuate inequality. Religion is a social institution, because it includes beliefs and
practices that serve the needs of society. Religion is also an example of a cultural universal, because it is found
in all societies in one form or another. Functionalism, conflict theory, and interactionism all provide valuable
ways for sociologists to understand religion.
15.2 World Religions
Sociological terms for different kinds of religious organizations are, in order of decreasing influence in society,
ecclesia, denomination, sect, and cult. Religions can be categorized according to what or whom its followers
worship. Some of the major, and oldest, of the world’s religions and related philosophies include Hinduism,
Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, Judaism, Islam, and Christianity. In the United States, the most widespread
religions are Christianity, Judaism, and Islam.
15.3 Religion in the United States
Liberation theology combines Christian principles with political activism to address social injustice,
discrimination, and poverty. Megachurches are those with a membership of more than 2,000 regular
attendees, and they are a vibrant, growing and highly influential segment of U.S. religious life. While the
numbers of people who identify as having no religious affiliation is rising in the United States, individual
motivations and ways of identifying may vary significantly.
15 • Key Terms

Section Quiz
15.1 The Sociological Approach to Religion
1. In what ways does religion serve the role of a social institution?
a.
Religions have a complex and integrated set of norms.
b.
Religious practices and beliefs are related to societal values.
c.
Religions often meet several basic needs.
d.
All of the above
2. A cultural universal is something that:
a.
addresses all aspects of a group’s behavior
b.
is found in all cultures
c.
is based on social norms
d.
may or may not be of value in meeting social needs
3. Which of the main theoretical perspectives would approach religion from the micro-level, studying how
religion impacts an individual’s sense of support and well-being?
a.
Functionalism
b.
Symbolic interactionism
c.
Conflict theory
d.
Feminism
4. Which perspective most emphasizes the ways in which religion helps keep the social system running
smoothly?
a.
Functional perspective
b.
Symbolic interactionist perspective
c.
Conflict perspective
d.
Feminist perspective
5. Which socialist perspective most emphasizes the ways in which religion helps to maintain social
inequalities within a society?
a.
Functional
b.
Symbolic interactionist
c.
Conflict theory
d.
Feminist perspective
6. Which of the following do the functionalist and conflict perspectives share?
a.
Position that religion relates to social control, enforcing social norms
b.
Emphasis on religion as providing social support
c.
Belief that religion helps explain the mysteries of life
d.
None of the above
7. The Protestant work ethic was viewed in terms of its relationship to:
a.
evolution and natural selection
b.
capitalism
c.
determinism
d.
prejudice and discrimination
15 • Section Quiz

15.2 World Religions
8. What are some denominations of the Christian Protestant church?
a.
Catholic and Jewish
b.
Jehovah’s Witnesses and Presbyterians
c.
Scientology and Hare Krishna
d.
Methodist and Seventh-day Adventist
9. A sect:
a.
has generally grown so large that it needs new buildings and multiple leaders
b.
often believes it must split from the larger group to return to important fundamentals
c.
is another term for a cult
d.
All of the above
10. The main difference between an ecclesia and a denomination is:
a.
the number of followers or believers is much larger for denominations
b.
the geographical location varies for ecclesia versus denominations
c.
ecclesia are state-sponsored and considered an official religion
d.
there are no important differences; the terms are interchangeable
11. Some controversial groups that may be mislabeled as cults include:
a.
Scientology and the Hare Krishna
b.
the Peoples Temple and Heaven’s Gate
c.
the Branch Davidians and the Manson Family
d.
Quakers and Pentecostals
12. In what part of the world have Confucianism and Taoism been primarily practiced?
a.
India
b.
Europe
c.
China
d.
The Middle East
13. Many stories in the sacred text of Judaism are:
a.
referred to as the Apocrypha
b.
oral traditions only because Judaism has no sacred text
c.
shared by Christianity and Islam
d.
no longer part of the Torah
14. What do Christianity and Islam have in common?
a.
Both believe in a single supreme god.
b.
Both share many of the same stories in their central religious texts.
c.
Both believe in an afterlife.
d.
All of the above
15.3 Religion in the United States
15. Social scientists refer to the use of a church to combat social injustice in the political realm as:
a.
the protestant work ethic
b.
conflict management
c.
liberation theology
d.
justice work
15 • Section Quiz

16. Megachurches tend to have:
a.
a variety of male and female clergy
b.
numerous buildings in which to meet
c.
high attendance for only a limited time
d.
large arenas where services are held
Short Answer
15.1 The Sociological Approach to Religion
1. List some ways that you see religion having social control in the everyday world.
2. What are some sacred items that you’re familiar with? Are there some objects, such as cups, candles, or
clothing, that would be considered profane in normal settings but are considered sacred in special
circumstances or when used in specific ways?
3. Consider a religion that you are familiar with, and discuss some of its beliefs, behaviors, and norms.
Discuss how these meet social needs. Then, research a religion that you don’t know much about. Explain
how its beliefs, behaviors, and norms are like/unlike the other religion.
15.2 World Religions
4. Consider the different types of religious organizations in the United States. What role did ecclesia play in
the history of the United States? How have sects tended to change over time? What role do cults have today?
5. What is your understanding of monotheism versus polytheism? How might your ideology be an obstacle to
understanding the theism of another religion you’re unfamiliar with?
6. In U.S. society, do you believe there is social stratification that correlates with religious beliefs? What about
within the practitioners of a given religion? Provide examples to illustrate your point.
15.3 Religion in the United States
7. Do you believe the United States is becoming more secularized or more fundamentalist? Comparing your
generation to that of your parents or grandparents, what differences do you see in the relationship between
religion and society? What would popular media have you believe is the state of religion in the United States
today?
Further Research
15.1 The Sociological Approach to Religion
For more discussion on the study of sociology and religion, check out The Immanent Frame
(http://openstax.org/l/immanent_frame/) is a forum for the exchange of ideas about religion, secularism,
and society by leading thinkers in the social sciences and humanities.
Read more about functionalist views on religion here (http://openstax.org/l/Grinnell_functionalism) . Read
more about women in the clergy here (http://openstax.org/l/women_clergy) .
Some would argue that the Protestant work ethic is still alive and well in the United States. Read British
historian Niall Ferguson’s view here (http://openstax.org/l/Protestant_work_ethic) .
15.2 World Religions
PBS’s Frontline explores “the life of Jesus and the rise of Christianity” in this in-depth documentary
(http://openstax.org/l/PBS_Frontline) . View the piece in its entirety here: .
For more insight on Confucianism, read the Analects by Confucius (http://openstax.org/l/Confucius_Analects) .
For a primer on Judaism, read Judaism 101 (http://openstax.org/l/Jew_FAQ) .
15 • Short Answer

Sorting through the different Christian denominations can be a daunting task. To help clarify these groups, go
to this page with information on Christian denominations (http://openstax.org/l/Christian_denominations) .
15.3 Religion in the United States
What is a megachurch and how are they changing the face of religion? Read “Exploring the Megachurch
Phenomena: Their Characteristics and Cultural Context” (http://openstax.org/l/megachurch) .
Curious about the LGBT religious movement? Visit the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD)
(http://openstax.org/l/GLAAD) and Human Rights Campaign (HRC) (http://openstax.org/l/
human_rights_campaign) web sites for current news about the growing inclusion of LGBT citizens into their
respective religious communities, both in the pews and from the pulpit.
How do Christians feel about gay marriage? How many Mormons are there in the United States? Check out the
Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life (http://openstax.org/l/Pew_Forum) , a research institute examining
U.S. religious trends.
References
Introduction
Durkheim, Émile. 1947 [1915]. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life, translated by J. Swain. Glencoe, IL:
Free Press.
15.1 The Sociological Approach to Religion
Barkan, Steven E., and Susan Greenwood. 2003. “Religious Attendance and Subjective Well-Being among Older
Americans: Evidence from the General Social Survey.” Review of Religious Research 45:116–129.
Durkheim, Émile. 1933 [1893]. Division of Labor in Society. Translated by George Simpson. New York: Free
Press.
Durkheim, Émile. 1947 [1915]. The Elementary Forms of Religious Life. Translated by J. Swain. Glencoe, IL:
Free Press.
Ellway, P. 2005. “The Rational Choice Theory of Religion: Shopping for Faith or Dropping your Faith?”
Retrieved February 21, 2012 (http://www.csa.com/discoveryguides/religion/overview.php).
Fasching, Darrel, and Dell deChant. 2001. Comparative Religious Ethics: A Narrative Approach. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley-Blackwel.
Finke, R., and R. Stark. 1988. “Religious Economies and Sacred Canopies: Religious Mobilization in American
Cities, 1906.” American Sociological Review 53:41–49.
Greeley, Andrew. 1989. “Protestant and Catholic: Is the Analogical Imagination Extinct?” American
Sociological Review 54:485–502.
Hechter, M. 1997. “Sociological Rational Choice Theory.” Annual Review of Sociology 23:191–214. Retrieved
January 20, 2012 (http://personal.lse.ac.uk/KANAZAWA/pdfs/ARS1997.pdf).
Hightower, Jim. 1975. Eat Your Heart Out: Food Profiteering in America. New York: Crown Publishers, Inc.
Marx, Karl. 1973 [1844]. Contribution to Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Ritzer, George. 1993. The McDonaldization of Society. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge.
Weber, Max. 2002 [1905]. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism and Other Writings, translated by
Peter R. Baehr and Gordon C. Wells. New York: Penguin.
15 • References

15.2 World Religions
Chernyakov, Valeriy and Gitelman, Zvi and Shapiro, Vladimir. 2010. “Religion and ethnicity: Judaism in the
ethnic consciousness of contemporary Russian Jews.” Ethnic and Racial Studies, Volume 20.
(https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/01419870.1997.9993962)
Craig, Mary, transl. 2002. The Pocket Dalai Lama. Boston, MA: Shambhala.
Feng, Gia-fu, and Jane English, transl. 1972. “Introduction” in Tao Te Ching. New York: Random House.
Glauz-Todrank, Annalise. 2014. “Race, Religion, or Ethnicity?: Situating Jews in the American Scene.” Religon
Compass, Volume 8, Issue 10. (https://doi.org/10.1111/rec3.12134)
Holy Bible: 1611 Edition, King James Version. 1982 [1611]. Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson.
Pew Research Center. 2020. “New Estimates Show U.S. Muslim Population Continues to Grow.”
(https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/01/03/new-estimates-show-u-s-muslim-population-
continues-to-grow/)
Smith, Huston. 1991 [1958]. The World’s Religions. San Francisco, CA: Harper Collins.
15.3 Religion in the United States
Barrick, Audrey. 2011. “Church Trial Set for Lesbian Methodist Minister.” Christian Post, Feb 15. Retrieved
January 22, 2012 (http://www.christianpost.com/news/church-trial-set-for-lesbian-methodist-
minister-48993).
Beck, Edward L. 2010. “Are Gay Priests the Problem?” ABC News/Good Morning America, April 15. Retrieved
January 22, 2012 (http://abcnews.go.com/GMA/Spirituality/gay-priests-problem/story?id=10381964).
Bird, Warren, and Scott Thumma. 2011. “A New Decade of Megachurches: 2011 Profile of Large Attendance
Churches in the United States.” Hartford Institute for Religion Research. Retrieved February 21, 2012
(http://hirr.hartsem.edu/megachurch/megachurch-2011-summary-report.htm).
Bogan, Jesse. 2009. “America’s Biggest Megachurches.” Forbes.com, June 26. Retrieved February 21, 2012
(http://www.forbes.com/2009/06/26/americas-biggest-megachurches-business-megachurches.html).
Crabtree, Steve, and Brett Pelham. 2009. “What Alabamians and Iranians Have in Common.” Gallup World,
February 9. Retrieved February 21, 2012 (http://www.gallup.com/poll/114211/alabamians-iranians-
common.aspx).
Hartford Institute for Religion Research a. “Database of Megachurches in the US.” Retrieved February 21,
2012 (http://hirr.hartsem.edu/megachurch/database.html).
Hartford Institute for Religion Research b. “Megachurch Definition.” Retrieved February 21, 2012
(http://hirr.hartsem.edu/megachurch/definition.html).
Human Rights Campaign. 2019. “Stances of Faiths on LGBTQ Issues.” (Series of web-based articles.)
(https://www.hrc.org/resources/stances-of-faiths-on-lgbt-issues-episcopal-church)
McKenna, Josephine. 2014. “Catholic Bishops Narrowly Reject a Wider Welcome to Gays, Divorced Catholics.”
Religion News Service. Retrieved Oct. 27, 2014 (http://www.religionnews.com/2014/10/18/gays-missing-
final-message-vaticans-heated-debate-family/).
NBC New York, 2020. “Episcopal Bishop to Resign Over Same-Sex Marriage Stance.”
(https://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/local/episcopal-bishop-to-resign-over-same-sex-marriage-stance/
2686504/)
Newport, Frank. 2003. “Americans Approve of Displays of Religious Symbols.” Gallup, October 3. Retrieved
February 21, 2012 (http://www.gallup.com/poll/9391/americans-approve-public-displays-religious-
15 • References

symbols.aspx).
Pasha-Robinson, Lucy. 2017. “Gay People To Blame for Hurricane Harvey, Say Evangelical Christian Leaders.”
The Independent. (https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/gay-people-hurricane-harvey-
blame-christian-leaders-texas-flooding-homosexuals-lgbt-a7933026.html)
Pew Research Center. 2020. “Religious Landscape Study.” (https://www.pewforum.org/religious-landscape-
study/)
Pew Research Forum. 2011. “The Future of the Global Muslim Population.” The Pew Forum on Religion and
Public Life, January 27. Retrieved February 21, 2012 (http://www.pewforum.org/The-Future-of-the-Global-
Muslim-Population.aspx).
Ward, Jon. 2011. “Michele Bachman Says Hurricane and Earthquake Are Divine Warnings to Washington.”
Huffington Post, August 29. Retrieved February 21, 2012 (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/08/29/
michele-bachmann-hurricane-irene_n_940209.html).
15 • References