FIGURE 17.1 In 2018, Florida voters made a decision regarding the voting rights of people convicted of a felony.
The referendum took a direct measure of the people's will, rather than navigating through representative process.
However, passing a referendum and enacting the laws to carry it out are two different processes, which Floridians
came to understand when the state government attached further obligations and restrictions to voting rights.
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER OUTLINE
17.1 Power and Authority
17.2 Forms of Government
17.3 Politics in the United States
17.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Government and Power
On November 6, 2018, Florida residents voted overwhelmingly to restore voting rights to
people convicted of most felonies after they had completed their sentences. Rather than undergoing the
complex process of passing a law through legislative representatives, the people voted directly on the matter as
part of their ballot, a process typically referred to as a referendum. The two-thirds majority in favor of the
referendum seemed to make the voters' intention clear, but their intentions would not be carried as directly as
they thought.
Many believe that voting is a privilege to be granted to "upstanding" citizens. The 14th Amendment gives
government the right to restrict voting for those who have "participated in rebellion or other crime." As of
2021, 48 states had some type of restrictions for people with felony convictions, though the vast majority of
Government and Politics

those permit people to vote upon completion of their sentence (ACLU 2021). At the time of the 2018
referendum, Florida had almost 1.7 million people unable to vote due to felony convictions, which was roughly
ten percent of its total population; to put it another way, Florida had more disenfranchised people than any
other state (Lewis 2018). Many statewide Florida elections are decided by only a few percentage points. For
example, the last three elections for governor were decided by less than two percent of the vote.
Disenfranchisement laws affect people of certain races, ethnicities, and socioeconomic status more
significantly than other groups. For example, in Florida, 23 percent of Black people were unable to vote
because of felony convictions (Brennan Center 2020).
Despite the overwhelming majority of citizens who supported the change, the Florida governor and legislature
effectively blocked the referendum's implementation. In early 2019, less than two weeks after the resolution
went into effect, the government passed a law indicating that voting would only be allowed for convicted felons
who served their sentences and had also paid all fines and penalties owed to the state. The effect was
significant: Fines associated with sentences can be quite large, and people with felony convictions have major
issues with employment. The law severely diminished the referendum's effect. By the time of the 2020
Presidential election, about 700,000 people with felony convictions, who had served their sentences, still could
not vote.
Many in Florida felt that their referendum clearly indicated the people's choice, and their power had been
taken. On the other hand, the legislators indicated that they were obtaining money owed to the state, and that
the brief, 140-word referendum didn't specify the method of implementation. Florida is going through a
conflict that has faced the nation from its earliest days: Who has the right to make decisions? Who has the
power?
17.1 Power and Authority
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Define and differentiate between power and authority
•
Identify and describe the three types of authority
17 • Government and Politics

FIGURE 17.2 Government buildings are built to symbolize authority, but they also represent a specific perspective
or message. The Capitol Complex in Bangladesh, Sher-e-Bangla Nagar, was designed to capture the essence of an
entirely new country. Rather than the fortress-like, Greek- and Roman-inspired structures of many government
buildings, architect Louis Kahn set the rounded, asymmetrical, modern complex within an artificial lake, with many
open spaces exposed to the elements (Credit: Lykantrop/Wikimedia Commons)
The world has almost 200 countries. Many of those countries have states or provinces with their own
governments. In some countries such as the United States and Canada, Native Americans and First Nations
have their own systems of government in some relationship with the federal government. Just considering
those thousands of different entities, it's easy to see what differentiates governments. What about what they
have in common? Do all of them serve the people? Protect the people? Increase prosperity?
The answer to those questions might be a matter of opinion, perspective, and circumstance. However, one
reality seems clear: Something all governments have in common is that they exert control over the people they
govern. The nature of that control—what we will define as power and authority—is an important feature of
society.
Sociologists have a distinctive approach to studying governmental power and authority that differs from the
perspective of political scientists. For the most part, political scientists focus on studying how power is
distributed in different types of political systems. They would observe, for example, that the United States’
political system is divided into three distinct branches (legislative, executive, and judicial), and they would
explore how public opinion affects political parties, elections, and the political process in general. Sociologists,
however, tend to be more interested in the influences of governmental power on society and in how social
conflicts arise from the distribution of power. Sociologists also examine how the use of power affects local,
state, national, and global agendas, which in turn affect people differently based on status, class, and
socioeconomic standing.
17.1 • Power and Authority

What Is Power?
FIGURE 17.3 Nazi leader Adolf Hitler was one of the most powerful and destructive dictators in modern history. He
is pictured here with fascist Benito Mussolini of Italy. (Credit: U.S. National Archives and Records Administration)
For centuries, philosophers, politicians, and social scientists have explored and commented on the nature of
power. Pittacus (c. 640–568 B.C.E.) opined, “The measure of a man is what he does with power,” and Lord Acton
perhaps more famously asserted, “Power tends to corrupt; absolute power corrupts absolutely” (1887). Indeed,
the concept of power can have decidedly negative connotations, and the term itself is difficult to define.
Many scholars adopt the definition developed by German sociologist Max Weber, who said that power is the
ability to exercise one’s will over others (Weber 1922). Power affects more than personal relationships; it
shapes larger dynamics like social groups, professional organizations, and governments. Similarly, a
government’s power is not necessarily limited to control of its own citizens. A dominant nation, for instance,
will often use its clout to influence or support other governments or to seize control of other nation states.
Efforts by the U.S. government to wield power in other countries have included joining with other nations to
form the Allied forces during World War II, entering Iraq in 2002 to topple Saddam Hussein’s regime, and
imposing sanctions on the government of North Korea in the hopes of constraining its development of nuclear
weapons.
Endeavors to gain power and influence do not necessarily lead to violence, exploitation, or abuse. Leaders such
as Martin Luther King Jr. and Mohandas Gandhi, for example, commanded powerful movements that effected
positive change without military force. Both men organized nonviolent protests to combat corruption and
injustice and succeeded in inspiring major reform. They relied on a variety of nonviolent protest strategies,
such as rallies, sit-ins, marches, petitions, and boycotts.
Modern technology has made such forms of nonviolent reform easier to implement. Often, protesters can use
cell phones and the Internet to disseminate information and plans to masses of protesters in a rapid and
efficient manner. Some governments like Myanmar, China, and Russia tamp down communication and protest
through platform bans or Internet blocks (see the Media and Technology chapter for more information). But in
the Arab Spring uprisings of 2010-11, for example, Twitter feeds and other social media helped protesters
17 • Government and Politics

coordinate their movements, share ideas, and bolster morale, as well as gain global support for their causes.
Social media was also important in getting accurate accounts of the demonstrations out to the world, in
contrast to many earlier situations in which government control of the media censored news reports. Notice
that in these examples, the users of power were the citizens rather than the governments. They found they had
power because they were able to exercise their will over their own leaders. Thus, government power does not
necessarily equate to absolute power.
FIGURE 17.4 Young people and students were among the most ardent supporters of democratic reform in the
recent Arab Spring. Social media also played an important role in rallying grassroots support. (Credit: cjb22/flickr)
Social Media as a Terrorist Tool
British aid worker, Alan Henning, was the fourth victim of the Islamic State (known as ISIS or ISIL) to be
beheaded before video cameras in a recording titled, “Another Message to America and Its Allies,” which was
posted on YouTube and pro-Islamic state Twitter feeds in the fall of 2014. Henning was captured during his
participation in a convoy taking medical supplies to a hospital in conflict-ravaged northern Syria. His death was
publicized via social media, as were the earlier beheadings of U.S. journalists Jim Foley and Steven Sotloff and
British aid worker David Haines. The terrorist groups also used social media to demand an end to intervention in
the Middle East by U.S., British, French, and Arab forces.
An international coalition, led by the United States, has been formed to combat ISIS in response to this series of
publicized murders. France and the United Kingdom, members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO),
and Belgium are seeking government approval through their respective parliaments to participate in airstrikes.
The specifics of target locations are a key point, however, and they emphasize the delicate and political nature of
current conflict in the region. Due to perceived national interest and geopolitical dynamics, Britain and France are
more willing to be a part of airstrikes on ISIS targets in Iran and likely to avoid striking targets in Syria. Several
Arab nations are a part of the coalition, including Bahrain, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and the United Arab
Emirates. Turkey, another NATO member, has not announced involvement in airstrikes, presumably because ISIS
BIG PICTURE
17.1 • Power and Authority

is holding forty-nine Turkish citizens hostage.
U.S. intervention in Libya and Syria is controversial, and it arouses debate about the role of the United States in
world affairs, as well as the practical need for, and outcome of, military action in the Middle East. Experts and the
U.S. public alike are weighing the need for fighting terrorism in its current form of the Islamic State and the bigger
issue of helping to restore peace in the Middle East. Some consider ISIS a direct and growing threat to the United
States if left unchecked. Others believe U.S. intervention unnecessarily worsens the Middle East situation and
prefer that resources be used at home rather than increasing military involvement in an area of the world where
they believe the United States has intervened long enough.
Types of Authority
The protesters in Tunisia and the civil rights protesters of Martin Luther King, Jr.’s day had influence apart
from their position in a government. Their influence came, in part, from their ability to advocate for what
many people held as important values. Government leaders might have this kind of influence as well, but they
also have the advantage of wielding power associated with their position in the government. As this example
indicates, there is more than one type of authority in a community.
Authority refers to accepted power—that is, power that people agree to follow. People listen to authority figures
because they feel that these individuals are worthy of respect. Generally speaking, people perceive the
objectives and demands of an authority figure as reasonable and beneficial, or true.
A citizen’s interaction with a police officer is a good example of how people react to authority in everyday life.
For instance, a person who sees the flashing red and blue lights of a police car in his rearview mirror usually
pulls to the side of the road without hesitation. Such a driver most likely assumes that the police officer behind
him serves as a legitimate source of authority and has the right to pull him over. As part of her official duties,
the police officer then has the power to issue a speeding ticket if the driver was driving too fast. If the same
officer, however, were to command the driver to follow her home and mow her lawn, the driver would likely
protest that the officer does not have the authority to make such a request.
Not all authority figures are police officers, elected officials or government authorities. Besides formal offices,
authority can arise from tradition and personal qualities. Economist and sociologist Max Weber realized this
when he examined individual action as it relates to authority, as well as large-scale structures of authority and
how they relate to a society’s economy. Based on this work, Weber developed a classification system for
authority. His three types of authority are traditional authority, charismatic authority and legal-rational
authority (Weber 1922).
Traditional
Charismatic
Legal-Rational
Source of
Power
Legitimized by long-
standing custom
Based on a leader’s personal
qualities
Authority resides in the
office, not the person
Leadership
Style
Historic personality
Dynamic personality
Bureaucratic officials
Example
Patriarchy (traditional
positions of authority)
Napoleon, Jesus Christ, Mother
Teresa, Martin Luther King, Jr.
U.S. presidency and
Congress
Modern British Parliament
TABLE 17.1 Weber’s Three Types of Authority Max Weber identified and explained three distinct types of authority:
17 • Government and Politics

Traditional Authority
According to Weber, the power of traditional authority is accepted because that has traditionally been the
case; its legitimacy exists because it has been accepted for a long time. Britain’s Queen Elizabeth, for instance,
occupies a position that she inherited based on the traditional rules of succession for the monarchy. People
adhere to traditional authority because they are invested in the past and feel obligated to perpetuate it. In this
type of authority, a ruler typically has no real force to carry out his will or maintain his position but depends
primarily on a group’s respect.
A more modern form of traditional authority is patrimonialism, which is traditional domination facilitated by
an administration and military that are purely personal instruments of the master (Eisenberg 1998). In this
form of authority, all officials are personal favorites appointed by the ruler. These officials have no rights, and
their privileges can be increased or withdrawn based on the caprices of the leader. The political organization of
ancient Egypt typified such a system: when the royal household decreed that a pyramid be built, every
Egyptian was forced to work toward its construction.
Traditional authority can be intertwined with race, class, and gender. In most societies, for instance, men are
more likely to be privileged than women and thus are more likely to hold roles of authority. Similarly, members
of dominant racial groups or upper-class families also win respect more readily. In the United States, the
Kennedy family, which has produced many prominent politicians, exemplifies this model.
Charismatic Authority
Followers accept the power of charismatic authority because they are drawn to the leader’s personal qualities.
The appeal of a charismatic leader can be extraordinary, and can inspire followers to make unusual sacrifices
or to persevere in the midst of great hardship and persecution. Charismatic leaders usually emerge in times of
crisis and offer innovative or radical solutions. They may even offer a vision of a new world order. Hitler’s rise
to power in the postwar economic depression of Germany is an example.
Charismatic leaders tend to hold power for short durations, and according to Weber, they are just as likely to be
tyrannical as they are heroic. Diverse male leaders such as Hitler, Napoleon, Jesus Christ, César Chávez,
Malcolm X, and Winston Churchill are all considered charismatic leaders. Because so few women have held
dynamic positions of leadership throughout history, the list of charismatic female leaders is comparatively
short. Many historians consider figures such as Joan of Arc, Margaret Thatcher, and Mother Teresa to be
charismatic leaders.
Rational-Legal Authority
According to Weber, power made legitimate by laws, written rules, and regulations is termed rational-legal
authority. In this type of authority, power is vested in a particular rationale, system, or ideology and not
necessarily in the person who implements the specifics of that doctrine. A nation that follows a constitution
applies this type of authority. On a smaller scale, you might encounter rational-legal authority in the workplace
via the standards set forth in the employee handbook, which provides a different type of authority than that of
your boss.
Of course, ideals are seldom replicated in the real world. Few governments or leaders can be neatly
categorized. Some leaders, like Mohandas Gandhi for instance, can be considered charismatic and legal-
rational authority figures. Similarly, a leader or government can start out exemplifying one type of authority
and gradually evolve or change into another type.
17.2 Forms of Government
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Define common forms of government, such as monarchy, oligarchy, dictatorship, and democracy
•
Compare common forms of government and identify real-life examples of each
17.2 • Forms of Government

FIGURE 17.5 After becoming the leader of the Indian National Congress, Mohandas Ghandi employed a range of
nonviolent methods to gain better rights and treatment for women and poor people and especially for the
independence of India. He used fasting as a form of protest, and was imprisoned by the ruling British government
(Credit: Elliot and Fry/Wikimedia Commons)
Most people generally agree that anarchy, or the absence of organized government, does not facilitate a
desirable living environment for society, but it is much harder for individuals to agree upon the particulars of
how a population should be governed. Throughout history, various forms of government have evolved to suit
the needs of changing populations and mindsets, each with pros and cons. Today, members of Western society
hold that democracy is the most just and stable form of government, although former British Prime Minister
Winston Churchill once declared to the House of Commons, “Indeed it has been said that democracy is the
worst form of government except for all those other forms that have been tried from time to time” (Shapiro
2006).
Monarchy
Even though people in the United States tend to be most aware of Great Britain’s royals, many other nations
also recognize kings, queens, princes, princesses, and other figures with official royal titles. The power held by
these positions varies from one country to another. Strictly speaking, a monarchy is a government in which a
single person (a monarch) rules until he or she dies or abdicates the throne. Usually, a monarch claims the
rights to the title by way of hereditary succession or as a result of some sort of divine appointment or calling.
As mentioned above, the monarchies of most modern nations are ceremonial remnants of tradition, and
individuals who hold titles in such sovereignties are often aristocratic figureheads.
A few nations today, however, are run by governments wherein a monarch has absolute or unmitigated power.
Such nations are called absolute monarchies. Although governments and regimes are constantly changing
across the global landscape, it is generally safe to say that most modern absolute monarchies are concentrated
in the Middle East and Africa. The small, oil-rich nation of Oman, for instance, is an example of an absolute
17 • Government and Politics

monarchy. In this nation, Sultan Qaboos bin Said ruled from the 1970s until his death in 2020, when his
cousin, Haitham bin Tariq, became Sultan. The Sultan creates all laws, appoints all judges, and has no formal
check on their power. Living conditions and opportunities for Oman’s citizens have improved to the point that
the UN ranked the nation as the most improved in the world in the past (UNDP 2010), but many citizens who
live under the reign of an absolute ruler must contend with oppressive or unfair policies that are installed
based on the unchecked whims or political agendas of that leader.
In today’s global political climate, monarchies far more often take the form of constitutional monarchies,
governments of nations that recognize monarchs but require these figures to abide by the laws of a greater
constitution. Many countries that are now constitutional monarchies evolved from governments that were
once considered absolute monarchies. In most cases, constitutional monarchies, such as Great Britain and
Canada, feature elected prime ministers whose leadership role is far more involved and significant than that of
its titled monarchs. In spite of their limited authority, monarchs endure in such governments because people
enjoy their ceremonial significance and the pageantry of their rites.
FIGURE 17.6 Qaboos bin Said ruled Oman as its absolute monarch for fifty years, and oversaw the country's
development from a relatively isolated nation to one that uses its vast supplies of oil to build wealth and influence.
Queen Noor of Jordan is the dowager queen of this constitutional monarchy and has limited political authority.
Queen Noor is American by birth, but relinquished her citizenship when she married. She is a noted global advocate
for Arab-Western relations. (Credit A: Wikimedia Commons; B: Skoll World Forum/flickr)
Oligarchy
The power in an oligarchy is held by a small, elite group. Unlike in a monarchy, members of an oligarchy do
not necessarily achieve their statuses based on ties to noble ancestry. Rather, they may ascend to positions of
power because of military might, economic power, or similar circumstances.
The concept of oligarchy is somewhat elusive; rarely does a society openly define itself as an oligarchy.
Generally, the word carries negative connotations and conjures notions of a corrupt group whose members
make unfair policy decisions in order to maintain their privileged positions. Many modern nations that claim
to be democracies are really oligarchies. In fact, some prominent journalists, such as Paul Krugman, who won
a Nobele laureate prize in economics, have labeled the United States an oligarchy, pointing to the influence of
large corporations and Wall Street executives on U.S. policy (Krugman 2011). Other political analysts assert
that all democracies are really just “elected oligarchies,” or systems in which citizens must vote for an
individual who is part of a pool of candidates who come from the society’s elite ruling class (Winters 2011).
Oligarchies have existed throughout history, and today many consider Russia an example of oligarchic political
structure. After the fall of communism, groups of business owners captured control of this nation’s natural
resources and have used the opportunity to expand their wealth and political influence. Once an oligarchic
power structure has been established, it can be very difficult for middle- and lower-class citizens to advance
17.2 • Forms of Government

their socioeconomic status.
Is the United States an Oligarchy?
FIGURE 17.7 The Breakers, the famous Newport, Rhode Island, home of the Vanderbilts, is a powerful symbol of
the extravagant wealth that characterized the Gilded Age. (Credit: ckramer/flickr)
The American Gilded Age saw the rise and dominance of ultra-rich families such as the Vanderbilts, Rockefellers,
and Carnegies, and the wealthy often indulged in absurd luxuries. One example is a lavish dinner party hosted for a
pampered pet dog who attended wearing a $15,000 diamond collar (PBS Online 1999). At the same time, most
Americans barely scraped by, living below what was considered the poverty level.
Some scholars believe that the United States has now embarked on a second gilded age, pointing out that the 400
wealthiest American families now own more than the ‘lower’ 150 million Americans put together (Zucman 2019),
and that the top 1% own more than the bottom 50%.
Wealthy individuals and corporations are major political donors. Based on campaign finance reform legislation in
1971 and 2002, political campaign contributions were regulated and limited; however, the 2012 Supreme Court
decision in the case of Citizens United versus the Federal Election Commission repealed many of those restrictions.
The Court ruled that contributions of corporations and unions to Political Action Committees (PACs) are a form of
free speech that cannot be abridged and so cannot be limited or disclosed. Opponents believe this is potentially a
step in promoting oligarchy in the United States; the ultra-wealthy and those who control the purse strings of large
corporations and unions will, in effect, be able to elect their candidate of choice through their unlimited spending
power, as well as influence policy decisions, appointments to nonelected government jobs, and other forms of
political power. Krugman (2011) says, “We have a society in which money is increasingly concentrated in the hands
of a few people, and in which that concentration of income and wealth threatens to make us a democracy in name
only.”
SOCIAL POLICY AND DEBATE
17 • Government and Politics

How will that threat be fully assessed? And just because a small group of people can exert influence, do they? And
does that influence work?
Wealthy people, and the companies and or industries they represent, use lobbying groups, think tanks, and
legislative consulting group to directly influence policy. Investigations have compiled the widespread use and
promotion of "model legislation," in which a lobbyist or industry group writes a bill that lawmakers then promote on
their own. USA Today/Arizona Republic found that from 2010-18, over 10,000 bills were pushed through
legislatures after being written and promoted by outside groups. These laws often thwart the will of the voters, or
place the interests of a very small group of people above those of everyone else. For example, the interestingly titled
Asbestos Transparency Bill was written by the asbestos industry to help protect it from lawsuits (O'Dell 2019). The
same organizations also identify, train, manage, and compensate expert witnesses to testify on their behalf in front
of various legislative and regulatory bodies.
Does it work? Political scientists studied who benefits from laws and policies, and found that 78 percent of
Congress's decisions benefit the top 10 percent of Americans. Note that those same laws sometimes benefit other
Americans as well. But only 5 percent of laws and policies have been shown to benefit the larger 90 percent of
people while not benefiting the wealthiest Americans (Represent.US 2014).
Dictatorship
Power in a dictatorship is held by a single person (or a very small group) that wields complete and absolute
authority over a government and population. Like some absolute monarchies, dictatorships may be corrupt
and seek to limit or even eradicate the liberties of the general population. Dictators use a variety of means to
perpetuate their authority. Economic and military might, as well as intimidation and brutality are often
foremost among their tactics; individuals are less likely to rebel when they are starving and fearful. Many
dictators start out as military leaders and are conditioned to the use of violence against opposition.
Some dictators also possess the personal appeal that Max Weber identified with a charismatic leader. Subjects
of such a dictator may believe that the leader has special ability or authority and may be willing to submit to
his or her authority. The late Kim Jong-Il, North Korean dictator, and his successor, Kim Jong-Un, exemplify
this type of charismatic dictatorship.
Some dictatorships do not align themselves with any particular belief system or ideology; the goal of this type
of regime is usually limited to preserving the authority of the dictator. A totalitarian dictatorship is even more
oppressive and attempts to control all aspects of its subjects’ lives; including occupation, religious beliefs, and
number of children permitted in each family. Citizens may be forced to publicly demonstrate their faith in the
regime by participating in marches and demonstrations.
Some “benevolent” dictators, such as Napoleon and Anwar Sadat, are credited with advancing their people’s
standard of living or exercising a moderate amount of evenhandedness. Others grossly abuse their power.
Joseph Stalin, Adolf Hitler, Saddam Hussein, Cambodia’s Pol Pot, and Zimbabwe’s Robert Mugabe, for instance,
are heads of state who earned a reputation for leading through fear and intimidation.
17.2 • Forms of Government

FIGURE 17.8 Dictator Kim Jong-Il of North Korea was a charismatic leader of an absolute dictatorship. His followers
responded emotionally to the death of their leader in 2011. (Credit: babeltrave/flickr)
Democracy
A democracy is a form of government that strives to provide all citizens with an equal voice, or vote, in
determining state policy, regardless of their level of socioeconomic status. Another important fundamental of
the democratic state is the establishment and governance of a just and comprehensive constitution that
delineates the roles and responsibilities of leaders and citizens alike.
Democracies, in general, ensure certain basic rights for their citizens. First and foremost, citizens are free to
organize political parties and hold elections. Leaders, once elected, must abide by the terms of the given
nation’s constitution and are limited in the powers they can exercise, as well as in the length of the duration of
their terms. Most democratic societies also champion freedom of individual speech, the press, and assembly,
and they prohibit unlawful imprisonment. Of course, even in a democratic society, the government constrains
citizens' total freedom to act however they wish. A democratically elected government does this by passing
laws and writing regulations that, at least ideally, reflect the will of the majority of its people.
Although the United States champions the democratic ideology, it is not a “pure” democracy. In a purely
democratic society, all citizens would vote on all proposed legislation, and this is not how laws are passed in
the United States. There is a practical reason for this: a pure democracy would be hard to implement. Thus, the
United States is a constitution-based federal republic in which citizens elect representatives to make policy
decisions on their behalf. The term representative democracy, which is virtually synonymous with republic,
can also be used to describe a government in which citizens elect representatives to promote policies that
favor their interests. In the United States, representatives are elected at local and state levels, and the votes of
the Electoral College determine who will hold the office of president. Each of the three branches of the U.S.
government—the executive, judicial, and legislative—is held in check by the other branches.
17 • Government and Politics

17.3 Politics in the United States
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Explain the significance of “one person, one vote” in determining U.S. policy
•
Discuss how voter participation affects politics in the United States
•
Explore the influence of race, gender, and class issues on the voting process
FIGURE 17.9 Americans' voting rights are a fundamental element of the U.S. democratic structure. In elections
people care about, the turnout can be very high, and people go to great lengths to ensure their vote is counted.
(Credit: GPA Photo Archive/flickr)
When describing a nation’s politics, we should define the term. We may associate the term with freedom,
power, corruption, or rhetoric. Political science looks at politics as the interaction between citizens and their
government. Sociology studies politics as a means to understand the underlying social norms and values of a
group. A society’s political structure and practices provide insight into the distribution of power and wealth, as
well as larger philosophical and cultural beliefs. A cursory sociological analysis of U.S. politics might suggest
that Americans' desire to promote equality and democracy on a theoretical level is at odds with the nation’s
real-life capitalist orientation.
Lincoln's famous phrase “of the people, by the people, for the people” is at the heart of the U.S. system and
sums up its most essential aspect: that citizens willingly and freely elect representatives they believe will look
out for their best interests. Although many Americans take free elections for granted, it is a vital foundation of
any democracy. When the U.S. government was formed, however, African Americans and women were denied
the right to vote. Each of these groups struggled to secure the same suffrage rights as their White male
counterparts, yet this history fails to inspire some Americans to show up at the polls and cast their ballots.
Problems with the democratic process, including limited voter turnout, require us to more closely examine
complex social issues that influence political participation.
Voter Participation
Voter participation is essential to the success of the U.S. political system. Although many Americans are quick
to complain about laws and political leadership, in any given election year roughly half the population does not
vote (United States Elections Project 2010). Some years have seen even lower turnouts; in 2010, for instance,
only 37.8 percent of the population participated in the electoral process (United States Elections Project 2011).
Poor turnout can skew election results, particularly if one age or socioeconomic group is more diligent in its
efforts to make it to the polls.
Certain voting advocacy groups work to improve turnout. Vote.org focuses on absentee voting, mail-in voting,
17.3 • Politics in the United States

and similar practices. Native Vote is an organization that strives to inform Native Americans about upcoming
elections and encourages their participation. National Council of La Raza and Voto Latino strive to improve
voter turnout among the Latino population. William Frey, author of Diversity Explosion, points out that the
number of Hispanic people, Asian people, and multiracial populations is expected to double in the next forty
years (Balz 2014).
Race, Gender, and Class Issues
Although recent records have shown more minorities voting now than ever before, this trend is still fairly new.
Historically, African Americans and other minorities have been underrepresented at the polls. Black men were
not allowed to vote at all until after the Civil War, and Black women gained the right to vote along with other
women only with the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920. For years, African Americans who
were brave enough to vote were discouraged by discriminatory legislation, passed in many southern states,
which required poll taxes and literacy tests of prospective voters. Literacy tests were not outlawed until 1965,
when President Lyndon Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act.
The 1960s saw other important reforms in U.S. voting. Shortly before the Voting Rights Act was passed, the
1964 U.S. Supreme Court case Reynolds v. Sims changed the nature of elections. This landmark decision
reaffirmed the notion of “one person, one vote,” a concept holding that all people’s votes should be counted
equally. Before this decision, unequal distributions of population enabled small groups of people in sparsely
populated rural areas to have as much voting power as the denser populations of urban areas. After Reynolds
v. Sims, districts were redrawn so that they would include equal numbers of voters.
Unfortunately, in June 2013 the Supreme Court repealed several important aspects of the 1965 Voting Rights
Act, ruling that southern states no longer need the stricter scrutiny that was once required to prohibit racial
discrimination in voting practices in the South. Following this decision, several states moved forward with
voter identification laws that had previously been banned by federal courts. Officials in Texas, Mississippi, and
Alabama claim that new identification (ID) laws are needed to reduce voter fraud. Opponents point to the
Department of Justice statistics indicating that only twenty-six voters, of 197 million voters in federal
elections, were found guilty of voter fraud between 2002 and 2005. "Contemporary voter identification laws
are trying to solve a problem that hasn’t existed in over a century” (Campbell, 2012). Opponents further note
that new voter ID laws disproportionately affect minorities and the poor, potentially prohibiting them from
exercising their right to vote.
Evidence suggests that legal protection of voting rights does not directly translate into equal voting power.
Relative to their presence in the U.S. population, women and racial/ethnic minorities are underrepresented in
the U.S. Congress. White men still dominate both houses. And until the inauguration of Barack Obama in 2009,
all U.S. presidents had been White men.
Like race and ethnicity, social class also has influenced voting practices. Voting rates among lower-educated,
lower-paid workers are lower than for people with higher socioeconomic status that fosters a system in which
people with more power and access to resources have the means to perpetuate their power. Several
explanations have been offered to account for this difference (Raymond 2010). Workers in low-paying service
jobs might find it harder to get to the polls because they lack flexibility in their work hours and quality daycare
to look after children while they vote. Because a larger share of racial and ethnic minorities is employed in
such positions, social class may be linked to race and ethnicity influencing voting rates. New requirements for
specific types of voter identification in some states are likely to compound these issues, because it may take
additional time away from work, as well as additional child care or transportation, for voters to get the needed
IDs. The impact on minorities and the impoverished may cause a further decrease in voter participation.
Attitudes play a role as well. Some people of low socioeconomic status or minority race/ethnicity doubt their
vote will count or voice will be heard because they have seen no evidence of their political power in their
communities. Many believe that what they already have is all they can achieve.
17 • Government and Politics

As suggested earlier, money can carry a lot of influence in U.S. democracy. But there are other means to make
one’s voice heard. Free speech can be influential, and people can participate in the democratic system through
volunteering with political advocacy groups, writing to elected officials, sharing views in a public forum such
as a blog or letter to the editor, forming or joining cause-related political organizations and interest groups,
participating in public demonstrations, and even running for a local office.
The Judicial System
The third branch of the U.S. government is the judicial system, which consists of local, state, and federal
courts. The U.S. Supreme Court is the highest court in the United States, and it has the final say on decisions
about the constitutionality of laws that citizens challenge. As noted earlier, some rulings have a direct impact
on the political system, such as recent decisions about voter identification and campaign financing. Other
Supreme Court decisions affect different aspects of society, and they are useful for sociological study because
they help us understand cultural changes. One example is a recent and highly controversial case that dealt
with the religious opposition of Hobby Lobby Stores Inc. to providing employees with specific kinds of
insurance mandated by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Another example is same-sex marriage
cases, which were expected to be heard by the Court; however, the Court denied review of these cases in the fall
of 2014. For now, the rulings of federal district courts stand, and states can continue to have differing
outcomes on same-sex marriage for their citizens.
17.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Government and Power
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Differentiate the ways that functionalists, conflict theorists, and interactionists view government and politics
Sociologists rely on organizational frameworks or paradigms to make sense of their study of sociology; already
there are many widely recognized schemas for evaluating sociological data and observations. Each paradigm
looks at the study of sociology through a unique lens. The sociological examination of government and power
can thus be evaluated using a variety of perspectives that help the evaluator gain a broader perspective.
Functionalism, conflict theory, and symbolic interactionism are a few of the more widely recognized
philosophical stances in practice today.
Functionalism
According to functionalism, the government has four main purposes: planning and directing society, meeting
social needs, maintaining law and order, and managing international relations. According to functionalism, all
aspects of society serve a purpose.
Functionalists view government and politics as a way to enforce norms and regulate conflict. Functionalists
see active social change, such as the sit-in on Wall Street, as undesirable because it forces change and, as a
result, undesirable things that might have to be compensated for. Functionalists seek consensus and order in
society. Dysfunction creates social problems that lead to social change. For instance, functionalists would see
monetary political contributions as a way of keeping people connected to the democratic process. This would
be in opposition to a conflict theorist who would see this financial contribution as a way for the rich to
perpetuate their own wealth.
Conflict Theory
Conflict theory focuses on the social inequalities and power difference within a group, analyzing society
through this lens. Philosopher and social scientist Karl Marx was a seminal force in developing the conflict
theory perspective; he viewed social structure, rather than individual personality characteristics, as the cause
of many social problems, such as poverty and crime. Marx believed that conflict between groups struggling to
either attain wealth and power or keep the wealth and power they had was inevitable in a capitalist society, and
conflict was the only way for the underprivileged to eventually gain some measure of equality.
17.4 • Theoretical Perspectives on Government and Power

C. Wright Mills (1956) elaborated on some of Marx’s concepts, coining the phrase power elite to describe what
he saw as the small group of powerful people who control much of a society. Mills believed the power elite use
government to develop social policies that allow them to keep their wealth. Contemporary theorist G. William
Domhoff (2011) elaborates on ways in which the power elite may be seen as a subculture whose members
follow similar social patterns such as joining elite clubs, attending select schools, and vacationing at a handful
of exclusive destinations.
Conflict Theory in Action
FIGURE 17.10 Although military technology has evolved considerably over the course of history, the fundamental
causes of conflict among nations remain essentially the same. (Credit: Wikimedia Commons)
Even before there were modern nation-states, political conflicts arose among competing societies or factions
of people. Vikings attacked continental European tribes in search of loot, and, later, European explorers landed
on foreign shores to claim the resources of indigenous groups. Conflicts also arose among competing groups
within individual sovereignties, as evidenced by the bloody French Revolution. Nearly all conflicts in the past
and present, however, are spurred by basic desires: the drive to protect or gain territory and wealth, and the
need to preserve liberty and autonomy.
According to sociologist and philosopher Karl Marx, such conflicts are necessary, although ugly, steps toward a
more egalitarian society. Marx saw a historical pattern in which revolutionaries toppled elite power structures,
after which wealth and authority became more evenly dispersed among the population, and the overall social
order advanced. In this pattern of change through conflict, people tend to gain greater personal freedom and
economic stability (1848).
Modern-day conflicts are still driven by the desire to gain or protect power and wealth, whether in the form of
land and resources or in the form of liberty and autonomy. Internally, groups within the U.S. struggle within
the system, by trying to achieve the outcomes they prefer. Political differences over budget issues, for example,
led to the recent shutdown of the federal government, and alternative political groups, such as the Tea Party,
are gaining a significant following.
The Arab Spring exemplifies oppressed groups acting collectively to change their governmental systems,
seeking both greater liberty and greater economic equity. Some nations, such as Tunisia, have successfully
transitioned to governmental change; others, like Egypt, have not yet reached consensus on a new
17 • Government and Politics

government.
Unfortunately, the change process in some countries reached the point of active combat between the
established government and the portion of the population seeking change, often called revolutionaries or
rebels. Libya and Syria are two such countries; the multifaceted nature of the conflict, with several groups
competing for their own desired ends, makes creation of a peaceful resolution more challenging.
Popular uprisings of citizens seeking governmental change have occurred this year in Bosnia, Brazil, Greece,
Iran, Jordan, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, Ukraine, and most recently in Hong Kong. Although much smaller in size
and scope, demonstrations occurred in the aftermath of the killing of George Floyd in the summer of 2020.
Some of these and related demonstrations went on for months. Small numbers of these protests or protesters
were violent, and many leaders in both the protest movement and government acknowledge that the protests
had changed focus to reflect general anti-government sentiments, rather than focusing on racial justice.
FIGURE 17.11 What symbols of the Boston Tea Party are represented in this painting? How might a symbolic
interactionist explain the way the modern-day Tea Party has reclaimed and repurposed these symbolic meanings?
(Credit: Wikimedia Commons)
Symbolic Interactionism
Other sociologists study government and power by relying on the framework of symbolic interactionism,
which is grounded in the works of Max Weber and George H. Mead.
Symbolic interactionism, as it pertains to government, focuses its attention on figures, emblems, or
individuals that represent power and authority. Many diverse entities in larger society can be considered
symbolic: trees, doves, wedding rings. Images that represent the power and authority of the United States
include the White House, the eagle, and the American flag. The Seal of the President of the United States, along
with the office in general, incites respect and reverence in many Americans.
Symbolic interactionists are not interested in large structures such as the government. As micro-sociologists,
they are more interested in the face-to-face aspects of politics. In reality, much of politics consists of face-to-
face backroom meetings and lobbyist efforts. What the public often sees is the front porch of politics that is
sanitized by the media through gatekeeping.
Symbolic interactionists are most interested in the interaction between these small groups who make
decisions, or in the case of some recent congressional committees, demonstrate the inability to make any
decisions at all. The heart of politics is the result of interaction between individuals and small groups over
17.4 • Theoretical Perspectives on Government and Power

periods of time. These meetings produce new meanings and perspectives that individuals use to make sure
there are future interactions.
17 • Government and Politics

Key Terms
absolute monarchies
governments wherein a monarch has absolute or unmitigated power
anarchy
the absence of any organized government
authority
power that people accept because it comes from a source that is perceived as legitimate
charismatic authority
power legitimized on the basis of a leader’s exceptional personal qualities
constitutional monarchies
national governments that recognize monarchs but require these figures to
abide by the laws of a greater constitution
democracy
a form of government that provides all citizens with an equal voice or vote in determining state
policy
dictatorship
a form of government in which a single person (or a very small group) wields complete and
absolute authority over a government or populace after the dictator rises to power, usually through
economic or military might
monarchy
a form of government in which a single person (a monarch) rules until that individual dies or
abdicates the throne
oligarchy
a form of government in which power is held by a small, elite group
one person, one vote
a concept holding that each person’s vote should be counted equally
patrimonialism
a type of authority wherein military and administrative factions enforce the power of the
master
politics
a means of studying a nation’s or group’s underlying social norms as values as evidenced through
its political structure and practices
power
the ability to exercise one’s will over others
power elite
a small group of powerful people who control much of a society
rational-legal authority
power that is legitimized by rules, regulations, and laws
representative democracy
a government wherein citizens elect officials to represent their interests
totalitarian dictatorship
an extremely oppressive form of dictatorship in which most aspects of citizens’
lives are controlled by the leader
traditional authority
power legitimized on the basis of long-standing customs
Section Summary
17.1 Power and Authority
Sociologists examine government and politics in terms of their impact on individuals and larger social
systems. Power is an entity or individual’s ability to control or direct others, while authority is influence that is
predicated on perceived legitimacy. Max Weber studied power and authority, differentiating between the two
concepts and formulating a system for classifying types of authority.
17.2 Forms of Government
Nations are governed by different political systems, including monarchies, oligarchies, dictatorships, and
democracies. Generally speaking, citizens of nations wherein power is concentrated in one leader or a small
group are more likely to suffer violations of civil liberties and experience economic inequality. Many nations
that are today organized around democratic ideals started out as monarchies or dictatorships but have evolved
into more egalitarian systems. Democratic ideals, although hard to implement and achieve, promote basic
human rights and justice for all citizens.
17.3 Politics in the United States
The success and validity of U.S. democracy hinges on free, fair elections that are characterized by the support
and participation of diverse citizens. In spite of their importance, elections have low participation. In the past,
the voice of minority groups was nearly imperceptible in elections, but recent trends have shown increased
voter turnout across many minority races and ethnicities. In the past, the creation and sustenance of a fair
17 • Key Terms

voting process has necessitated government intervention, particularly on the legislative level. The Reynolds v.
Sims case, with its landmark “one person, one vote” ruling, is an excellent example of such action.
17.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Government and Power
Sociologists use frameworks to gain perspective on data and observations related to the study of power and
government. Functionalism suggests that societal power and structure is predicated on cooperation,
interdependence, and shared goals or values. Conflict theory, rooted in Marxism, asserts that societal
structures are the result of social groups competing for wealth and influence. Symbolic interactionism
examines a smaller realm of sociological interest: the individual’s perception of symbols of power and their
subsequent reaction to the face-to-face interactions of the political realm.
Section Quiz
17.1 Power and Authority
1. Which statement best expresses the difference between power and authority?
a.
Authority involves intimidation.
b.
Authority is more subtle than power.
c.
Authority is based on the perceived legitimacy of the individual in power.
d.
Authority is inherited, but power is seized by military force.
2. Which of the following types of authority does not reside primarily in a leader?
a.
Dictatorial
b.
Traditional
c.
Charismatic
d.
Legal-rational
3. In the U.S. Senate, it is customary to assign each senator a seniority ranking based on years of government
service and the population of the state he or she represents. A top ranking gives the senator priority for
assignments to office space, committee chair positions, and seating on the senate floor. What type of
authority does this example best illustrate?
a.
Dictatorial
b.
Traditional
c.
Charismatic
d.
Legal-rational
4. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. used his public speaking abilities and magnetism to inspire African Americans
to stand up against injustice in an extremely hostile environment. He is an example of a(n) __________
leader.
a.
traditional
b.
charismatic
c.
legal-rational
d.
illegitimate
5. Which current world figure has the least amount of political power?
a.
President Barack Obama
b.
Queen Elizabeth II
c.
British Prime Minister David Cameron
d.
North Korean leader Kim Jong-Un
17 • Section Quiz

6. Which statement best expresses why there have been so few charismatic female leaders throughout
history?
a.
Women have different leadership styles than men.
b.
Women are not interested in leading at all.
c.
Few women have had the opportunity to hold leadership roles over the courseof history.
d.
Male historians have refused to acknowledge the contributions of female leaders in their records.
17.2 Forms of Government
7. Many constitutional monarchies started out as:
a.
oligarchies
b.
absolute monarchies
c.
dictatorships
d.
democracies
8. Which nation is an absolute monarchy?
a.
Oman
b.
Great Britain
c.
Denmark
d.
Australia
9. Which of the following present and former government leaders is generally considered a dictator?
a.
David Cameron
b.
Barack Obama
c.
Qaboos bin Said Al Said
d.
Kim Jong-Un
10. A(n) _________________ is an extremely oppressive government that seeks to control all aspects of its
citizens’ lives.
a.
oligarchy
b.
totalitarian dictatorship
c.
anarchy
d.
absolute monarchy
11. Which is not a characteristic of a democracy?
a.
People vote to elect officials.
b.
A king or queen holds the majority of governmental control.
c.
One goal of this type of government is to protect citizens’ basic rights.
d.
A constitution typically outlines the foundational ideas of how this government should operate.
12. Which statement best expresses why the United States is not a true democracy?
a.
Many politicians are corrupt.
b.
Special-interest groups fund political campaigns.
c.
Citizens elect representatives who vote on their behalf to make policy.
d.
Ancient Greece was the only true democracy.
17 • Section Quiz

17.3 Politics in the United States
13. In the past, Southern states discouraged African Americans from voting by requiring them to take a
_____________________ test.
a.
blood
b.
literacy
c.
lie detector
d.
citizenship
14. Which president signed the Voting Rights Act?
a.
Lyndon Johnson
b.
John F. Kennedy Jr.
c.
Barack Obama
d.
Franklin D. Roosevelt
15. Which factor does not influence voting practices?
a.
Race
b.
Social class
c.
Ethnicity
d.
Voting booths
16. The U.S. Supreme Court case _________________ led to the revision of voting districts to account for
differences in population density.
a.
Roe v. Wade
b.
Reynolds v. Sims
c.
Brown v. Board of Education
d.
Marbury v. Madison
17. Which statement best explains the meaning of “one person, one vote”?
a.
One person should not be allowed to vote twice.
b.
A voter deserves one chance to vote.
c.
A voter should vote only once a year.
d.
All people's votes should count equally.
17.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Government and Power
18. Which concept corresponds best to functionalism?
a.
Happiness
b.
Interdependence
c.
Revolution
d.
Symbolism
19. Which sociologist is not associated with conflict theory?
a.
C. Wright Mills
b.
G. William Domhoff
c.
Karl Marx
d.
George H. Mead
17 • Section Quiz

20. Karl Marx believed social structures evolve through:
a.
supply and demand
b.
enlightenment
c.
conflict
d.
cooperation
21. The Arab Spring, Occupy Wall Street protests, and the Tea Party movement have the following in common:
a.
They sought to destroy central government.
b.
They are examples of conflict theory in action.
c.
They can only occur in a representative democracy.
d.
They used violence as the means of achieving their goals.
22. Which is not one of functionalism’s four main purposes of government?
a.
Maintaining law and order
b.
Meeting social needs
c.
Equally distributing resources
d.
Planning and directing society
23. Sociologist G. William Domhoff’s Who Rules America? asserts that wealth is often necessary to exert the
most influence over social and political systems. This is a ____ perspective.
a.
conflict theory
b.
symbolic interactionist
c.
functionalist
d.
feminist
24. Which of the following paradigms would consider movements such as Occupy Wall Street undesirable and
unnecessarily forcing social change?
a.
Symbolic interactionism
b.
Functionalism
c.
Feminism
d.
Conflict theory
Short Answer
17.1 Power and Authority
1. Explain why leaders as divergent as Hitler and Jesus Christ are both categorized as charismatic authorities.
2. Why do people accept traditional authority figures even though these types of leaders have limited means
of enforcing their power?
3. Charismatic leaders are among the most fascinating figures in history. Select a charismatic leader about
whom you wish to learn more and conduct online research to find out about this individual. Then write a
paragraph describing the personal qualities that led to this person’s influence, considering the society in
which he or she emerged.
17.2 Forms of Government
4. Do you feel the United States has become an oligarchy? Why, or why not?
5. Explain how an absolute monarchy differs from a dictatorship.
6. In which form of government do average citizens have the least political power? What options might they
have for exerting political power under this type of regime?
17 • Short Answer

17.3 Politics in the United States
7. If the percentage of Asian Americans in Congress is far below the percentage of Asian Americans in the
United States, does that mean Asian Americans lack political power? Why or why not?
8. Explain how a voter’s social class can affect his or her voting practices.
9. Besides voting, how can U.S. citizens influence political processes and outcomes? Which of these strategies
have you personally used?
17.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Government and Power
10. What is one criticism of functionalism?
11. Explain what is meant by the term power elite. Consider its original intention as coined by C. Wright Mills
as well as your understanding of it.
Further Research
17.1 Power and Authority
Want to learn more about sociologists at work in the real world? Read this overview of sociological perspectives
on disenfranchisement of people convicted of felonies (https://openstax.org/l/3efelondisen) .
17.2 Forms of Government
The Tea Party is among the highest-profile grassroots organizations active in U.S. politics today. What is its
official platform? Examine the Tea Party website (http://openstax.org/l/2eTeaPartygov) to find out more
information.
17.3 Politics in the United States
The 1965 Voting Rights Act was preceded by Lyndon Johnson’s signing of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Both
articles were instrumental in establishing equal rights for African Americans. Check out Cornell
University’s website on this civil rights (http://openstax.org/l/2EDemoNow) to learn more about this civil
rights legislation.
17.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Government and Power
Functionalism is a complex philosophical theory that pertains to a variety of disciplines beyond sociology. Visit
the entry devoted to functionalism on Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (http://openstax.org/l/
Stanford_functionalism) for a more comprehensive overview.
References
Introduction
ACLU. 2020. "State Disenfranchisement Laws (Map)." American Civil Liberties Union. (https://www.aclu.org/
issues/voting-rights/voter-restoration/felony-disenfranchisement-laws-map)
Brennan Center for Justice. 2019. "Voter Restoration Efforts in Florida." (https://www.brennancenter.org/our-
work/research-reports/voting-rights-restoration-efforts-florida)
Lewis, Sarah. A. 2018. "The Disenfranchisement of Ex-Felons in Florida: A Brief History." University of Florida.
(https://scholarship.law.ufl.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1846&context=facultypub)
17.1 Power and Authority
Acton, Lord. 2010 [1887]. Essays on Freedom and Power. Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute.
Catrer, Chelsea, and Fantz, Ashley. 2014. “ISIS Video Shows Beheading of American Journalist Steven Sotloft.”
17 • Further Research

CNN, September 9. Retrieved October 5, 2014 (http://www.cnn.com/2014/09/02/world/meast/isis-
american-journalist-sotloff/)
Eisenberg, Andrew. 1998. “Weberian Patrimonialism and Imperial Chinese History.” Theory and Society
27(1):83–102.
Hosenball, Mark, and Westall, Slyvia. 2014. “Islamic State Video Shows Second British Hostage Beheaded.”
Reuters, October 4. Retrieved October 5, 2014 (http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/10/04/us-mideast-
crisis-henning-behading-idUSKCN0HS1XX20141004)
NPR. 2014. “Debate: Does U.S. Military Intervention in the Middle East help or Hurt?” October 7. Retrieved
October 7, 2014 (http://www.npr.org/2014/10/07/353294026/debate-does-u-s-military-intervention-in-the-
middle-east-help-or-hurt)
Mullen, Jethro. 2014. “U.S.-led airstrikes on ISIS in Syria: What you need to know.” CNN, September 24.
Retrieved October 5, 2014 (http://www.cnn.com/2014/09/23/world/meast/syria-isis-airstrikes-explainer/)
Mullen, Jethro (2014). “U.S.-led airstrikes on ISIS in Syria: Who's in, who's not”. CNN, October 2, 2014.
Retrieved October 5, 2014 (http://www.cnn.com/2014/09/23/world/meast/syria-airstrikes-countries-
involved/)
Pollock, John. 2011. “How Egyptian and Tunisian Youth Hijacked the Arab Spring.” Technology Review,
September/October. Retrieved January 23, 2012 (http://www.technologyreview.com/web/38379/).
Weber, Max. 1978 [1922]. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Weber, Max. 1947 [1922]. The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. Translated by A. M. Henderson and
T. Parsons. New York: Oxford University Press.
17.2 Forms of Government
Balz, Dan. 2014. "For GOP, demographic opportunities, challenges await". The Washington Post. Retrieved
December 11, 2014. (http://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/for-gop-demographic-opportunities-
challenges-await/2014/11/29/407118ae-7720-11e4-9d9b-86d397daad27_story.html)
Dunbar, John (2012). “The Citizen’s United Decision and Why It Matters” The Center for Public Integrity.
October 18, 2012. Retrieved October 2, 2014 (http://www.publicintegrity.org/2012/10/18/11527/citizens-
united-decision-and-why-it-matters)
Krugman, Paul. 2011. “Oligarchy, American Style.” New York Times, November 3. Retrieved February 14, 2012
(http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/04/opinion/oligarchy-american-style.html).
O'Dell, Rob and Penzenstadler, Nick. 2019. "You elected them to write new laws. They're letting corporations do
it instead." USA Today. (https://www.usatoday.com/in-depth/news/investigations/2019/04/03/abortion-gun-
laws-stand-your-ground-model-bills-conservatives-liberal-corporate-influence-lobbyists/3162173002/)
PBS Online. “Gilded Age.” 1999. The American Experience. Retrieved February 14, 2012 (http://www.pbs.org/
wgbh/amex/carnegie/gildedage.html).
Represent.US. 2014. "The U.S. Is an Oligarchy? The Research Explained." (https://bulletin.represent.us/u-s-
oligarchy-explain-research/)
Schulz, Thomas. 2011. “The Second Gilded Age: Has America Become an Oligarchy?” Spiegel Online
International, October 28. Retrieved February 14, 2012 (http://www.spiegel.de/international/spiegel/
0,1518,793896,00.html).
UNDP. 2010. "Five Arab Countries Among Top Leaders in Long-Term Gains." United Nations.
(http://hdr.undp.org/en/mediacentre/news/announcements/title,21573,en.html)
17 • References

Winters, Jeffrey. 2011. “Oligarchy and Democracy.” American Interest, November/December. Retrieved
February 17, 2012 (http://www.the-american-interest.com/article.cfm?piece=1048).
Zucman, Gabriel. 2019. "Global Wealth Inequality." Annual Review of Economics. May 2019. (https://gabriel-
zucman.eu/files/Zucman2019.pdf)
17.3 Politics in the United States
Bingham, Amy. 2012. “Voter Fraud: Non-Existent Problem or Election-Threatening Epidemic?” ABC News,
September 12. Retrieved October 2, 2014 (http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/OTUS/voter-fraud-real-rare/
story?id=17213376)
Cooper, Michael. 2013. “After Ruling, States Rush to Enact Voting Laws” The New York Times, July 5. Retrieved
October 1, 2014 (http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/06/us/politics/after-Supreme-Court-ruling-states-rush-
to-enact-voting-laws.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0)
Dinan, Stephen. 2013. “Supreme Court Says Voting Rights Act of 1965 is No Longer Relevant” The Washington
Times, June 25. Retrieved October 1, 2014 (http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2013/jun/25/court-
past-voting-discrimination-no-longer-held/?page=all)
IT Chicago-Kent School of Law. 2014. U.S. Supreme Court Media OYEZ. Retrieved October 7, 2014
(http://www.oyez.org/)
Lopez, Mark Hugo and Paul Taylor. 2009. “Dissecting the 2008 Electorate: the Most Diverse in U.S. History.”
Pew Research Center. April 30. Retrieved April 24, 2012 (http://pewresearch.org/assets/pdf/
dissecting-2008-electorate.pdf).
Raymond, Jose. 2010. “Why Poor People Don’t Vote.” Change.org, June 6. Retrieved February 17, 2012.
United States Elections Project. 2010. “2008 General Election Turnout Rates.” October 6. Retrieved February
14, 2012 (http://elections.gmu.edu/Turnout_2008G.html).
United States Elections Project. 2011. “2010 General Election Turnout Rates.” December 12. Retrieved
February 14, 2012 (http://elections.gmu.edu/Turnout_2010G.html).
17.4 Theoretical Perspectives on Government and Power
Domhoff, G. William. 2011. “Who Rules America?” Sociology Department at University of California, Santa
Cruz. Retrieved January 23, 2012 (http://www2.ucsc.edu/whorulesamerica/).
Marx, Karl. 1848. Manifesto of the Communist Party. Retrieved January 09, 2012 (http://www.marxists.org/
archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/).
17 • References