FIGURE 19.1 Medical personnel are at the front lines of extremely dangerous work. Personal protective clothing is
essential for any health worker entering an infection zone. (Credit: Navy Medicine/flickr)
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER OUTLINE
19.1 The Social Construction of Health
19.2 Global Health
19.3 Health in the United States
19.4 Comparative Health and Medicine
19.5 Theoretical Perspectives on Health and Medicine
On March 19, 2014 a "mystery" hemorrhagic fever outbreak occurred in Liberia and Sierra
Leone. This outbreak was later confirmed to be Ebola, a disease first discovered in what is now the Democratic
Republic of Congo. The 2014-2016 outbreak sickened more than 28,000 people and left more than 11,000
dead (CDC 2020).
For the people in West Africa, the outbreak was personally tragic and terrifying. In much of the rest of the
world, the outbreak increased tensions, but did not change anyone's behavior. Infection of U.S. medical staff
(both in West Africa and at home) led to fear and distrust, and restrictions on flights from West Africa was one
proposed way to stop the spread of the disease. Ebola first entered the United States via U.S. missionary
medical staff who were infected in West Africa and then transported home for treatment. Several other Ebola
outbreaks occurred in West Africa in subsequent years, killing thousands of people.
Six years after the massive 2014 epidemic, the people of West Africa faced another disease, but this time they
were not alone. The Coronavirus pandemic swept across the globe in a matter of months. While some
Health and Medicine

countries managed the disease far better than others, it affected everyone. Highly industrialized countries,
such as China, Italy, and the United States, were early centers of the outbreak. Brazil and India had later
increases, as did the U.K. and Russia. Most countries took measures that were considered extreme—closing
their borders, forcing schools and businesses to close, transforming their people's lives. Other nations went
further, completely shutting down at the discovery of just a few cases. And some countries had mixed
responses, typically resulting in high rates of infection and overwhelming losses of life. In Brazil and the
United States, for example, political leaders and large swaths of the populations rejected measures to contain
the virus. By the time vaccines became widely available, those two countries had the highest numbers of
coronavirus death worldwide.
Did the world learn from the Ebola virus epidemics? Or did only parts of it learn? Prior to the United States
facing the worst COVID-19 outbreak in the world, the government shut down travel, as did many countries in
Europe. This was certainly an important step, but other measures fell short; conflicting messages about mask
wearing and social distancing became political weapons amid the country's Presidential election, and
localized outbreaks and spikes of deaths were continually traced to gatherings that occurred against scientific
guidance. Brazil's president actively disputed medical opinions, rejected any travel or business restrictions,
and was in conflict with many people in his own government (even his political allies); with Brazil's slower
pace of vaccination compared to the U.S., it saw a steep increase in cases and deaths just as the United States'
numbers started to decline.
Both those opposed to heavy restrictions and those who used them to fight the disease acknowledge that the
impacts went far beyond physical health. Families shattered by the loss of a loved one had to go through the
pain without relatives to support them at funerals or other gatherings. Many who recovered from the virus had
serious health issues to contend with, while other people who delayed important treatments had larger
problems than they normally would have. Fear, isolation, and strained familial relationships led to emotional
problems. Many families lost income. Learning was certainly impacted as education practices went through
sudden shifts. The true outcomes will likely not be fully understood for years after the pandemic is under
control.
So now, after the height of the coronavirus pandemic, what does “health” mean to you? Does your opinion of it
differ from your pre-COVID attitudes? Many people who became severely ill or died from COVID had other
health issues (known as comorbidities) such as hypertension and obesity. Do you know people whose attitudes
about their general health changed? Do you know people who are more or less suspicious of the government,
more or less likely to listen to doctors or scientists? What do you think will be the best way to prevent illness
and death should another pandemic strike?
Medical sociology is the systematic study of how humans manage issues of health and illness, disease and
disorders, and healthcare for both the sick and the healthy. Medical sociologists study the physical, mental,
and social components of health and illness. Major topics for medical sociologists include the doctor/patient
relationship, the structure and socioeconomics of healthcare, and how culture impacts attitudes toward
disease and wellness.
19.1 The Social Construction of Health
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Define the term medical sociology
•
Differentiate between the cultural meaning of illness, the social construction of illness, and the social
construction of medical knowledge
The social construction of health is a major research topic within medical sociology. At first glance, the concept
of a social construction of health does not seem to make sense. After all, if disease is a measurable,
physiological problem, then there can be no question of socially constructing disease, right? Well, it’s not that
19 • Health and Medicine

simple. The idea of the social construction of health emphasizes the socio-cultural aspects of the discipline’s
approach to physical, objectively definable phenomena.
Sociologists Conrad and Barker (2010) offer a comprehensive framework for understanding the major findings
of the last fifty years of development in this concept. Their summary categorizes the findings in the field under
three subheadings: the cultural meaning of illness, the social construction of the illness experience, and the
social construction of medical knowledge.
The Cultural Meaning of Illness
Many medical sociologists contend that illnesses have both a biological and an experiential component and
that these components exist independently of each other. Our culture, not our biology, dictates which illnesses
are stigmatized and which are not, which are considered disabilities and which are not, and which are deemed
contestable (meaning some medical professionals may find the existence of this ailment questionable) as
opposed to definitive (illnesses that are unquestionably recognized in the medical profession) (Conrad and
Barker 2010).
For instance, sociologist Erving Goffman (1963) described how social stigmas hinder individuals from fully
integrating into society. In essence, Goffman (1963) suggests we might view illness as a stigma that can push
others to view the ill in an undesirable manner. The stigmatization of illness often has the greatest effect on
the patient and the kind of care they receive. Many contend that our society and even our healthcare
institutions discriminate against certain diseases—like mental disorders, AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases,
and skin disorders (Sartorius 2007). Facilities for these diseases may be sub-par; they may be segregated from
other healthcare areas or relegated to a poorer environment. The stigma may keep people from seeking help
for their illness, making it worse than it needs to be.
Contested illnesses are those that are questioned or questionable by some medical professionals. Disorders
like fibromyalgia or chronic fatigue syndrome may be either true illnesses or only in the patients’ heads,
depending on the opinion of the medical professional. This dynamic can affect how a patient seeks treatment
and what kind of treatment they receive.
The Social Construction of the Illness Experience
The idea of the social construction of the illness experience is based on the concept of reality as a social
construction. In other words, there is no objective reality; there are only our own perceptions of it. The social
construction of the illness experience deals with such issues as the way some patients control the manner in
which they reveal their diseases and the lifestyle adaptations patients develop to cope with their illnesses.
In terms of constructing the illness experience, culture and individual personality both play a significant role.
For some people, a long-term illness can have the effect of making their world smaller, more defined by the
illness than anything else. For others, illness can be a chance for discovery, for re-imaging a new self (Conrad
and Barker 2007). Culture plays a huge role in how an individual experiences illness. Widespread diseases like
AIDS or breast cancer have specific cultural markers that have changed over the years and that govern how
individuals—and society—view them.
Today, many institutions of wellness acknowledge the degree to which individual perceptions shape the nature
of health and illness. Regarding physical activity, for instance, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC)
recommends that individuals use a standard level of exertion to assess their physical activity. This Rating of
Perceived Exertion (RPE) gives a more complete view of an individual’s actual exertion level, since heartrate or
pulse measurements may be affected by medication or other issues (Centers for Disease Control 2011a).
Similarly, many medical professionals use a comparable scale for perceived pain to help determine pain
management strategies.
19.1 • The Social Construction of Health

FIGURE 19.2 PAIN ASSESSMENT TOOL. The Mosby pain rating scale helps health care providers assess an
individual’s level of pain. What might a symbolic interactionist observe about this method? (Credit: Arvin61r58/
openclipart)
The Social Construction of Medical Knowledge
Conrad and Barker show how medical knowledge is socially constructed; that is, it can both reflect and
reproduce inequalities in gender, class, race, and ethnicity. Conrad and Barker (2011) use the example of the
social construction of women’s health and how medical knowledge has changed significantly in the course of a
few generations. For instance, in the early nineteenth century, pregnant women were discouraged from driving
or dancing for fear of harming the unborn child, much as they are discouraged, with more valid reason, from
smoking or drinking alcohol today.
Has Breast Cancer Awareness Gone Too Far?
FIGURE 19.3 Pink ribbons are a ubiquitous reminder of breast cancer. But do pink ribbon chocolates do anything to
eradicate the disease? (Credit: wishuponacupcake/Wikimedia Commons)
Every October, the world turns pink. Football and baseball players wear pink accessories. Skyscrapers and large
public buildings are lit with pink lights at night. Shoppers can choose from a huge array of pink products. In 2014,
people wanting to support the fight against breast cancer could purchase any of the following pink products:
KitchenAid mixers, Master Lock padlocks and bike chains, Wilson tennis rackets, Fiat cars, and Smith & Wesson
handguns. You read that correctly. The goal of all these pink products is to raise awareness and money for breast
cancer. However, the relentless creep of pink has many people wondering if the pink marketing juggernaut has gone
SOCIAL POLICY AND DEBATE
19 • Health and Medicine

too far.
Pink has been associated with breast cancer since 1991, when the Susan G. Komen Foundation handed out pink
ribbons at its 1991 Race for the Cure event. Since then, the pink ribbon has appeared on countless products, and
then by extension, the color pink has come to represent support for a cure of the disease. No one can argue about
the Susan G. Komen Foundation’s mission—to find a cure for breast cancer—or the fact that the group has raised
millions of dollars for research and care. However, some people question if, or how much, all these products really
help in the fight against breast cancer (Begos 2011).
The advocacy group Breast Cancer Action (BCA) position themselves as watchdogs of other agencies fighting breast
cancer. They accept no funding from entities, like those in the pharmaceutical industry, with potential profit
connections to this health industry. They’ve developed a trademarked “Think Before You Pink” campaign to provoke
consumer questioning of the end contributions made to breast cancer by companies hawking pink wares. They do
not advise against “pink” purchases; they just want consumers to be informed about how much money is involved,
where it comes from, and where it will go. For instance, what percentage of each purchase goes to breast cancer
causes? BCA does not judge how much is enough, but it informs customers and then encourages them to consider
whether they feel the amount is enough (Think Before You Pink 2012).
BCA also suggests that consumers make sure that the product they are buying does not actually contribute to breast
cancer, a phenomenon they call “pinkwashing.” This issue made national headlines in 2010, when the Susan G.
Komen Foundation partnered with Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC) on a promotion called “Buckets for the Cure.” For
every bucket of grilled or regular fried chicken, KFC would donate fifty cents to the Komen Foundation, with the goal
of reaching 8 million dollars: the largest single donation received by the foundation. However, some critics saw the
partnership as an unholy alliance. Higher body fat and eating fatty foods has been linked to increased cancer risks,
and detractors, including BCA, called the Komen Foundation out on this apparent contradiction of goals. Komen’s
response was that the program did a great deal to raise awareness in low-income communities, where Komen
previously had little outreach (Hutchison 2010).
What do you think? Are fundraising and awareness important enough to trump issues of health? What other
examples of “pinkwashing” can you think of?
19.2 Global Health
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Define social epidemiology
•
Apply theories of social epidemiology to an understanding of global health issues
•
Differentiate high-income and low-income nations
Social epidemiology is the study of the causes and distribution of diseases. Social epidemiology can reveal
how social problems are connected to the health of different populations. These epidemiological studies show
that the health problems of high-income nations differ from those of low-income nations, but also that
diseases and their diagnosis are changing. Cardiovascular disease, for example, is now the both most prevalent
disease and the disease most likely to be fatal in lower-income countries. And globally, 70 percent of
cardiovascular disease cases and deaths are due to modifiable risks (Dagenais 2019).
Some theorists differentiate among three types of countries: core nations, semi-peripheral nations, and
peripheral nations. Core nations are those that we think of as highly developed or industrialized, semi-
peripheral nations are those that are often called developing or newly industrialized, and peripheral nations
are those that are relatively undeveloped. While the most pervasive issue in the U.S. healthcare system is
affordable access to healthcare, other core countries have different issues, and semi-peripheral and peripheral
nations are faced with a host of additional concerns. Reviewing the status of global health offers insight into the
various ways that politics and wealth shape access to healthcare, and it shows which populations are most
19.2 • Global Health

affected by health disparities.
Health in High-Income Nations
Obesity, which is on the rise in high-income nations, has been linked to many diseases, including
cardiovascular problems, musculoskeletal problems, diabetes, and respiratory issues. According to the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2011), obesity rates are rising in all countries, with
the greatest gains being made in the highest-income countries. The United States has the highest obesity rate
at 42 percent; some of these people are considered severely obese, which occurs in 9 percent of U.S. adults
(Hales 2020).
Wallace Huffman and his fellow researchers (2006) contend that several factors are contributing to the rise in
obesity in developed countries:
•
Improvements in technology and reduced family size have led to a reduction of work to be done in
household production.
•
Unhealthy market goods, including processed foods, sweetened drinks, and sweet and salty snacks are
replacing home-produced goods.
•
Leisure activities are growing more sedentary, for example, computer games, web surfing, and television
viewing.
•
More workers are shifting from active work (agriculture and manufacturing) to service industries.
•
Increased access to passive transportation has led to more driving and less walking.
Obesity and weight issues have significant societal costs, including lower life expectancies and higher shared
healthcare costs.
While ischemic heart disease is the single most prevalent cause of death in higher-income countries, cancers
of all types combine to be a higher overall cause of death. Cancer accounts for twice as many deaths as
cardiovascular disease in higher-income countries (Mahase 2019).
Health in Low-Income Nations
In peripheral nations with low per capita income, it is not the cost of healthcare that is the most pressing
concern. Rather, low-income countries must manage such problems as infectious disease, high infant
mortality rates, scarce medical personnel, and inadequate water and sewer systems. Due to such health
concerns, low-income nations have higher rates of infant mortality and lower average life spans.
One of the biggest contributors to medical issues in low-income countries is the lack of access to clean water
and basic sanitation resources. According to a 2014 UNICEF report, almost half of the developing world’s
population lacks improved sanitation facilities. The World Health Organization (WHO) tracks health-related
data for 193 countries, and organizes them by region. In their 2011 World Health Statistics report, they
document the following statistics:
•
Globally in 2019, the rate of mortality for children under five was 38 per 1,000 live births, which is a
dramatic change from previous decades. (In 1990, the rate was 93 deaths per 1,000 births (World Health
Organization 2020.)) In low-income countries, however, that rate is much higher. The child mortality rate
in low-income nations was 11 times higher than that of high-income countries—76 deaths per 1,000 births
compared to 7 deaths per 1,000 births (Keck 2020). To consider it regionally, the highest under-five
mortality rate remains in the WHO African Region (74 per 1000 live births), around 9 times higher than
that in the WHO European Region (8 per 1000 live births) (World Health Organization 2021).
•
The most frequent causes of death in children under five years old are pneumonia, diarrhea, congenital
anomalies, preterm birth complications, birth asphyxia/trauma, and malaria, all of which can be
prevented or treated with affordable interventions including immunization, adequate nutrition, safe water
and food and quality care by a trained health provider when needed.
The availability of doctors and nurses in low-income countries is one-tenth that of nations with a high income.
19 • Health and Medicine

Challenges in access to medical education and access to patients exacerbate this issue for would-be medical
professionals in low-income countries (World Health Organization 2011).
19.3 Health in the United States
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Apply social epidemiology to health in the United States
•
Explain disparities of health based on gender, socioeconomic status, race, and ethnicity
•
Summarize mental health and disability issues in the United States
•
Explain the terms stigma and medicalization
Health in the United States is a complex and often contradictory issue. One the one hand, as one of the
wealthiest nations, the United States fares well in health comparisons with the rest of the world. However, the
United States also lags behind almost every industrialized country in terms of providing care to all its citizens.
The following sections look at different aspects of health in the United States.
Health by Race and Ethnicity
When looking at the social epidemiology of the United States, it is hard to miss the disparities among races.
The discrepancy between Black and White Americans shows the gap clearly; in 2018, the average life
expectancy for White males was approximately five years longer than for Black males: 78.8 compared to 74.7
(Wamsley 2021). (Note that in 2020 life expectancies of all races declined further, though the unprecedented
COVID-19 pandemic was a significant cause.) Other indicates show a similar disparity. The 2018 infant
mortality rates for different races and ethnicities are as follows:
•
Non-Hispanic Black people: 10.8
•
Native Hawaiian people or other Pacific Islanders: 9.4
•
Native American/Alaska Native people: 8.2
•
Hispanic people: 4.9
•
Non-Hispanic White people: 4.6
•
Asian and Asian American people: 3.6 (Centers for Disease Control 2021)
According to a report from the Henry J. Kaiser Foundation (2007), African Americans also have higher
incidence of several diseases and causes of mortality, from cancer to heart disease to diabetes. In a similar
vein, it is important to note that ethnic minorities, including Mexican Americans and Native Americans, also
have higher rates of these diseases and causes of mortality than White people.
Lisa Berkman (2009) notes that this gap started to narrow during the Civil Rights movement in the 1960s, but
it began widening again in the early 1980s. What accounts for these perpetual disparities in health among
different ethnic groups? Much of the answer lies in the level of healthcare that these groups receive. The
National Healthcare Disparities Report shows that even after adjusting for insurance differences, racial and
ethnic minority groups receive poorer quality of care and less access to care than dominant groups. The
Report identified these racial inequalities in care:
•
Black people, Native Americans, and Alaska Native people received worse care than Whites for about 40
percent of quality measures.
•
Hispanic people, Native Hawaiian people, and Pacific Islanders received worse care than White people for
more than 30 percent of quality measures.
•
Asian people received worse care than White people for nearly 30 percent of quality measures but better
care for nearly 30 percent of quality measures (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 2020).
Health by Socioeconomic Status
Discussions of health by race and ethnicity often overlap with discussions of health by socioeconomic status,
since the two concepts are intertwined in the United States. As the Agency for Health Research and Quality
19.3 • Health in the United States

(2010) notes, “racial and ethnic minorities are more likely than non-Hispanic whites to be poor or near poor,”
so much of the data pertaining to subordinate groups is also likely to be pertinent to low socioeconomic
groups. Marilyn Winkleby and her research associates (1992) state that “one of the strongest and most
consistent predictors of a person's morbidity and mortality experience is that person's socioeconomic status
(SES). This finding persists across all diseases with few exceptions, continues throughout the entire lifespan,
and extends across numerous risk factors for disease.” Morbidity is the incidence of disease.
It is important to remember that economics are only part of the SES picture; research suggests that education
also plays an important role. Phelan and Link (2003) note that many behavior-influenced diseases like lung
cancer (from smoking), coronary artery disease (from poor eating and exercise habits), and AIDS initially were
widespread across SES groups. However, once information linking habits to disease was disseminated, these
diseases decreased in high SES groups and increased in low SES groups. This illustrates the important role of
education initiatives regarding a given disease, as well as possible inequalities in how those initiatives
effectively reach different SES groups.
Health by Gender
Women are affected adversely both by unequal access to and institutionalized sexism in the healthcare
industry. According to a recent report from the Kaiser Family Foundation, women experienced a decline in
their ability to see needed specialists between 2001 and 2008. In 2008, one quarter of women questioned the
quality of their healthcare (Ranji and Salganico 2011). Quality is partially indicated by access and cost. In 2018,
roughly one in four (26%) women—compared to one in five (19%) men—reported delaying healthcare or letting
conditions go untreated due to cost. Because of costs, approximately one in five women postponed preventive
care, skipped a recommended test or treatment, or reduced their use of medication due to cost (Kaiser Family
Foundation 2018).
We can see an example of institutionalized sexism in the way that women are more likely than men to be
diagnosed with certain kinds of mental disorders. Psychologist Dana Becker notes that 75 percent of all
diagnoses of Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) are for women according to the Diagnostic Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders. This diagnosis is characterized by instability of identity, of mood, and of behavior,
and Becker argues that it has been used as a catch-all diagnosis for too many women. She further decries the
pejorative connotation of the diagnosis, saying that it predisposes many people, both within and outside of the
profession of psychotherapy, against women who have been so diagnosed (Becker).
Many critics also point to the medicalization of women’s issues as an example of institutionalized sexism.
Medicalization refers to the process by which previously normal aspects of life are redefined as deviant and
needing medical attention to remedy. Historically and contemporaneously, many aspects of women’s lives
have been medicalized, including menstruation, premenstrual syndrome, pregnancy, childbirth, and
menopause. The medicalization of pregnancy and childbirth has been particularly contentious in recent
decades, with many women opting against the medical process and choosing a more natural childbirth. Fox
and Worts (1999) find that all women experience pain and anxiety during the birth process, but that social
support relieves both as effectively as medical support. In other words, medical interventions are no more
effective than social ones at helping with the difficulties of pain and childbirth. Fox and Worts further found
that women with supportive partners ended up with less medical intervention and fewer cases of postpartum
depression. Of course, access to quality birth care outside the standard medical models may not be readily
available to women of all social classes.
19 • Health and Medicine

Medicalization of Sleeplessness
FIGURE 19.4 Many people fail to get enough sleep. But is insomnia a disease that should be cured with medication?
(Credit: Wikimedia Commons)
How is your “sleep hygiene?” Sleep hygiene refers to the lifestyle and sleep habits that contribute to sleeplessness.
Bad habits that can lead to sleeplessness include inconsistent bedtimes, lack of exercise, late-night employment,
napping during the day, and sleep environments that include noise, lights, or screen time (National Institutes of
Health 2011a).
According to the National Institute of Health, examining sleep hygiene is the first step in trying to solve a problem
with sleeplessness.
For many people in the United States, however, making changes in sleep hygiene does not seem to be enough.
According to a 2006 report from the Institute of Medicine, sleeplessness is an underrecognized public health
problem affecting up to 70 million people. It is interesting to note that in the months (or years) after this report was
released, advertising by the pharmaceutical companies behind Ambien, Lunesta, and Sepracor (three sleep aids)
averaged $188 million weekly promoting these drugs (Gellene 2009).
According to a study in the American Journal of Public Health (2011), prescriptions for sleep medications increased
dramatically from 1993 to 2007. While complaints of sleeplessness during doctor’s office visits more than doubled
during this time, insomnia diagnoses increased more than sevenfold, from about 840,000 to 6.1 million. The authors
of the study conclude that sleeplessness has been medicalized as insomnia, and that “insomnia may be a public
health concern, but potential overtreatment with marginally effective, expensive medications with nontrivial side
effects raises definite population health concerns” (Moloney, Konrad, and Zimmer 2011). Indeed, a study published
in 2004 in the Archives of Internal Medicine shows that cognitive behavioral therapy, not medication, was the most
effective sleep intervention (Jacobs, Pace-Schott, Stickgold, and Otto 2004).
A century ago, people who couldn’t sleep were told to count sheep. Now they pop a pill, and all those pills add up to
a very lucrative market for the pharmaceutical industry. Is this industry behind the medicalization of sleeplessness,
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
19.3 • Health in the United States

or is it just responding to a need?
Mental Health and Disability
The treatment received by those defined as mentally ill or disabled varies greatly from country to country. In
the post-millennial United States, those of us who have never experienced such a disadvantage take for
granted the rights our society guarantees for each citizen. We do not think about the relatively recent nature of
the protections, unless, of course, we know someone constantly inconvenienced by the lack of
accommodations or misfortune of suddenly experiencing a temporary disability.
Mental Health
People with mental disorders (a condition that makes it more difficult to cope with everyday life) and people
with mental illness (a severe, lasting mental disorder that requires long-term treatment) experience a wide
range of effects. According to the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), the United States has over 50
million adults with mental illness or mental disorder, or 20 percent of the total adult population. Of these, 13
million have what is considered serious mental illness or mental disorder (5 percent of the adult population);
serious mental illness is that which causes impairment or disability (National Institute of Mental Health 2021).
Finally, 16.5 percent of children aged 6-17 experienced mental illness or disorder (National Alliance on Mental
Illness 2021).
The most common mental disorders in the United States are anxiety disorders. Almost 18 percent of U.S.
adults are likely to be affected in a single year, and 28 percent are likely to be affected over the course of a
lifetime (Anxiety and Depression Institute of America 2021). It is important to distinguish between occasional
feelings of anxiety and a true anxiety disorder. Anxiety is a normal reaction to stress that we all feel at some
point, but anxiety disorders are feelings of worry and fearfulness that last for months at a time. Anxiety
disorders include obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), panic disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
and both social and specific phobias.
The second most common mental disorders in the United States are mood disorders; roughly 10 percent of
U.S. adults are likely to be affected yearly, while 21 percent are likely to be affected over the course of a lifetime
(National Institute of Mental Health 2005). Mood disorders are the most common causes of illness-related
hospitalization in the U.S. (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 2021). Major mood disorders are
depression and dysthymic disorder. Like anxiety, depression might seem like something that everyone
experiences at some point, and it is true that most people feel sad or “blue” at times in their lives. A true
depressive episode, however, is more than just feeling sad for a short period. It is a long-term, debilitating
illness that usually needs treatment to cure. Bipolar disorder is characterized by dramatic shifts in energy and
mood, often affecting the individual’s ability to carry out day-to-day tasks. Bipolar disorder used to be called
manic depression because of the way people would swing between manic and depressive episodes.
Depending on what definition is used, there is some overlap between mood disorders and personality
disorders, which affect 9 percent of people in the United States yearly. A personality disorder is an enduring
and inflexible pattern of long duration leading to significant distress or impairment, that is not due to use of
substances or another medical condition. In other words, personality disorders cause people to behave in ways
that are seen as abnormal to society but seem normal to them.
The diagnosis and classification regarding personality disorders has been evolving and is somewhat
controversial. To guide diagnosis and potential treatments of mental disorders, the American Psychological
Association publishes the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual on Mental Disorders (DSM). Experts working on
the latest version initially proposed changing the categories of personality disorders. However, the final
publication retains the original ten categories, but contains an alternate/emerging approach for classifying
them. This evolution demonstrates the challenges and the wide array of treating conditions, and also
represents areas of difference between theorists, practitioners, governing bodies, and other stakeholders. As
19 • Health and Medicine

discussed in the Sociological Research chapter, study and investigation is a diligent and multi-dimensional
process. As the diagnostic application evolves, we will see how their definitions help scholars across
disciplines understand the intersection of health issues and how they are defined by social institutions and
cultural norms.
FIGURE 19.5 Medication is a common option for children with ADHD. (Credit: Deviation56/Wikimedia Commons)
Another commonly diagnosed mental disorder is Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), which
affects 9 percent of U.S. children and 4 percent of adults on a lifetime basis (Danielson 2018). Since ADHD is
one of the most common childhood disorders, it is often incorrectly considered only a disease found in
children. But ADHD can be a serious issue for adults who either had been diagnosed as children or who are
diagnosed as adults. ADHD is marked by difficulty paying attention, difficulty controlling behavior, and
hyperactivity. As a result, it can lead to educational and behavioral issues in children, success issues in college,
and challenges in workplace and family life. However, there is some social debate over whether such drugs are
being overprescribed (American Psychological Association). A significant difficulty in diagnosis, treatment,
and societal understanding of ADHD is that it changes in expression based on a wide range of factors,
including age (CHADD 2020).
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) encompass a group of developmental brain disorders that are characterized
by "deficits in social interaction, verbal and nonverbal communication, and engagement in repetitive
behaviors or interests” (National Institute of Mental Health). As of 2021, the CDC estimates that 1 in 54
children has an autism spectrum disorder. Beyond the very high incidence, the rate of diagnosis has been
increasing steadily as awareness became more widespread. In 2005, the rate was 1 in 166 children; in 2012 it
was 1 in 88 children. The rate of increase and awareness has assisted diagnosis and treatment, but autism is a
cause of significant fear among parents and families. Because of its impact on relationships and especially
verbal communication, children with autism (and their parents) can be shunned, grossly misunderstood, and
mistreated. For example, people with an autism spectrum disorder who cannot verbalize are often assumed to
be unintelligent, or are sometimes left out of conversations or activities because others feel they cannot
participate. Parents may be reluctant to let their children play with or associate with children with ASD. Adults
with ASD go through many of the same misconceptions and mistreatments, such as being denied
opportunities or being made to feel unwelcome (Applied Behavior Analysis).
19.3 • Health in the United States

Disability
FIGURE 19.6 The handicapped accessible sign indicates that people with disabilities can access the facility. The
Americans with Disabilities Act requires that access be provided to everyone. (Credit: Ltljltlj/Wikimedia Commons)
Disability refers to a reduction in one’s ability to perform everyday tasks. The World Health Organization
makes a distinction between the various terms used to describe handicaps that’s important to the sociological
perspective. They use the term impairment to describe the physical limitations, while reserving the term
disability to refer to the social limitation.
Before the passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990, people in the United States with
disabilities were often excluded from opportunities and social institutions many of us take for granted. This
occurred not only through employment and other kinds of discrimination but also through casual acceptance
by most people in the United States of a world designed for the convenience of the able-bodied. Imagine being
in a wheelchair and trying to use a sidewalk without the benefit of wheelchair-accessible curbs. Imagine as a
blind person trying to access information without the widespread availability of Braille. Imagine having limited
motor control and being faced with a difficult-to-grasp round door handle. Issues like these are what the ADA
tries to address. Ramps on sidewalks, Braille instructions, and more accessible door levers are all
accommodations to help people with disabilities.
People with disabilities can be stigmatized by their illnesses. Stigmatization means their identity is spoiled;
they are labeled as different, discriminated against, and sometimes even shunned. They are labeled (as an
interactionist might point out) and ascribed a master status (as a functionalist might note), becoming “the
blind girl” or “the boy in the wheelchair” instead of someone afforded a full identity by society. This can be
especially true for people who are disabled due to mental illness or disorders.
As discussed in the section on mental health, many mental health disorders can be debilitating and can affect
a person’s ability to cope with everyday life. This can affect social status, housing, and especially employment.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (2011), people with a disability had a higher rate of unemployment
than people without a disability in 2010: 14.8 percent to 9.4 percent. This unemployment rate refers only to
people actively looking for a job. In fact, eight out of ten people with a disability are considered “out of the labor
force;” that is, they do not have jobs and are not looking for them. The combination of this population and the
high unemployment rate leads to an employment-population ratio of 18.6 percent among those with
disabilities. The employment-population ratio for people without disabilities was much higher, at 63.5 percent
(U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 2011).
19 • Health and Medicine

Obesity: The Last Acceptable Prejudice?
Many people who see a person with obesity may make negative assumptions about them based on their size. 
According to a study from the Yale Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity, large people are the object of
“widespread negative stereotypes that overweight and obese persons are lazy, unmotivated, lacking in self-
discipline, less competent, noncompliant, and sloppy” (Puhl and Heuer 2009).
Historically, both in the United States and elsewhere, it was considered acceptable to discriminate against people 
based on prejudiced opinions. Even after slavery was abolished through the 13th Amendment in 1865, 
institutionalized racism and prejudice against Black people persisted. In an example of stereotype 
interchangeability, the same insults that are flung today at the overweight and obese population (lazy, for 
instance) have been flung at various racial and ethnic groups in earlier history.
Why is it considered acceptable to feel prejudice toward—even to hate—people with obesity? Puhl and Heuer 
suggest that these feelings stem from the perception that obesity is preventable through self-control, better diet, 
and more exercise. Highlighting this contention is the fact that studies have shown that people’s perceptions of 
obesity are more positive when they think the obesity was caused by non-controllable factors like biology (a thyroid 
condition, for instance) or genetics.
Health experts emphasize that obesity is a disease, and that it is not the result of simple overeating. There are often 
a number of contributing factors that make it more difficult to avoid. Even with some understanding of non-
controllable factors that might affect obesity, people with obesity are still subject to stigmatization. Puhl and 
Heuer’s study is one of many that document discrimination at work, in the media, and even in the medical 
profession. Large people are less likely to get into college than thinner people, and they are less likely to succeed at 
work.
Stigmatization of people with obesity comes in many forms, from the seemingly benign to the potentially illegal. In 
movies and television shows, overweight people are often portrayed negatively, or as stock characters who are the 
butt of jokes. One study found that in children’s movies “obesity was equated with negative traits (evil, unattractive, 
unfriendly, cruel) in 64 percent of the most popular children's videos. In 72 percent of the videos, characters with 
thin bodies had desirable traits, such as kindness or happiness” (Hines and Thompson 2007). In movies and 
television for adults, the negative portrayal is often meant to be funny. Think about the way you have seen obese 
people portrayed in movies and on television; now think of any other subordinate group being openly denigrated in 
such a way. It is difficult to find a parallel example.
19.4 Comparative Health and Medicine
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Explain the different types of health care available in the United States
•
Compare the health care system of the United States with that of other countries
There are broad, structural differences among the healthcare systems of different countries. In core nations,
those differences might arise in the administration of healthcare, while the care itself is similar. In peripheral
and semi-peripheral countries, a lack of basic healthcare administration can be the defining feature of the
system. Most countries rely on some combination of modern and traditional medicine. In core countries with
large investments in technology, research, and equipment, the focus is usually on modern medicine, with
traditional (also called alternative or complementary) medicine playing a secondary role. In the United States,
for instance, the American Medical Association (AMA) resolved to support the incorporation of complementary
and alternative medicine in medical education. In developing countries, even quickly modernizing ones like
China, traditional medicine (often understood as “complementary” by the western world) may still play a
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
19.4 • Comparative Health and Medicine

larger role.
U.S. Healthcare
U.S. healthcare coverage can broadly be divided into two main categories: public healthcare (government-
funded) and private healthcare (privately funded).
The two main publicly funded healthcare programs are Medicare, which provides health services to people
over sixty-five years old as well as people who meet other standards for disability, and Medicaid, which
provides services to people with very low incomes who meet other eligibility requirements. Other government-
funded programs include service agencies focused on Native Americans (the Indian Health Service), Veterans
(the Veterans Health Administration), and children (the Children’s Health Insurance Program).
Private insurance is typically categorized as either employment-based insurance or direct-purchase
insurance. Employment-based insurance is health plan coverage that is provided in whole or in part by an
employer or union; it can cover just the employee, or the employee and their family. Direct purchase insurance
is coverage that an individual buys directly from a private company.
Even with all these options, a sizable portion of the U.S. population remains uninsured. In 2019, about 26
million people, or 8 percent of U.S. residents, had no health insurance. 2020 saw that number go up to 31
million (Keith 2020). Several more million had health insurance for part of the year (Keisler-Starkey 2020).
Uninsured people are at risk of both severe illness and also chronic illnesses that develop over time. Fewer
uninsured people engage in regular check-ups or preventative medicine, and rely on urgent care for a range of
acute health issues.
The number of uninsured people is far lower than in previous decades. In 2013 and in many of the years
preceding it, the number of uninsured people was in the 40 million range, or roughly 18 percent of the
population. The Affordable Care Act, which came into full force in 2014, allowed more people to get affordable
insurance. The uninsured number reached its lowest point in 2016, before beginning to climb again (Garfield
2019).
People having some insurance may mask the fact that they could be underinsured; that is, people who pay at
least 10 percent of their income on healthcare costs not covered by insurance or, for low-income adults, those
whose medical expenses or deductibles are at least 5 percent of their income (Schoen, Doty, Robertson, and
Collins 2011).
Why are so many people uninsured or underinsured? Skyrocketing healthcare costs are part of the issue.
While most people get their insurance through their employer, not all employers offer it, especially retail
companies or small businesses in which many of the workers may be part time. Finally, for many years
insurers could deny coverage to people with pre-existing conditions--previous illnesses or chronic diseases.
The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (often abbreviated ACA or nicknamed Obamacare) was a
landmark change in U.S. healthcare. Passed in 2010 and fully implemented in 2014, it increased eligibility to
programs like Medicaid, helped guarantee insurance coverage for people with pre-existing conditions, and
established regulations to make sure that the premium funds collected by insurers and care providers go
directly to medical care. It also included an individual mandate, which requires everyone to have insurance
coverage by 2014 or pay a penalty. A series of provisions, including significant subsidies, are intended to
address the discrepancies in income that are currently contributing to high rates of uninsurance and
underinsurance. In 2012 the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the ACA's individual mandate.
29 million people in the United States have gained health insurance under ACA (Economic Policy Institute
2021).
19 • Health and Medicine

FIGURE 19.7 The Affordable Care Act has been a savior for some and a target for others. As Congress and various
state governments sought to have it overturned with laws or to have it diminished by the courts, supporters took to
the streets to express its importance to them. (Credit: Molly Adams)
The ACA remains contentious. The Supreme Court ruled in the case of National Federation of Independent
Businesses v. Sebelius in 2012, that states cannot be forced to participate in the PPACA's Medicaid expansion.
This ruling opened the door to further challenges to the ACA in Congress and the Federal courts, some state
governments, conservative groups and independent businesses. The ACA has been a driving factor in elections
and public opinion. In 2010 and 2014, many Republican gains in Congressional seats were related to fierce
concern about Obamacare. However, once millions of people were covered by the law and the economy
continued to improve, public sentiment and elections swung the other way. Healthcare was the top issue for
voters, and desire to preserve the law was credited for many of the Democratic gains in the election, which
carried over to 2020.
Healthcare Elsewhere
Clearly, healthcare in the United States has some areas for improvement. But how does it compare to
healthcare in other countries? Many people in the United States are fond of saying that this country has the
best healthcare in the world, and while it is true that the United States has a higher quality of care available
than many peripheral or semi-peripheral nations, it is not necessarily the “best in the world.” In a report on
how U.S. healthcare compares to that of other countries, researchers found that the United States does
“relatively well in some areas—such as cancer care—and less well in others—such as mortality from conditions
amenable to prevention and treatment” (Docteur and Berenson 2009).
One critique of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is that it will create a system of socialized
medicine, a term that for many people in the United States has negative connotations lingering from the Cold
War era and earlier. Under a socialized medicine system, the government owns and runs the system. It
employs the doctors, nurses, and other staff, and it owns and runs the hospitals (Klein 2009). The best example
of socialized medicine is in Great Britain, where the National Health System (NHS) gives free healthcare to all
its residents. And despite some U.S. citizens’ knee-jerk reaction to any healthcare changes that hint of
19.4 • Comparative Health and Medicine

socialism, the United States has one socialized system with the Veterans Health Administration.
It is important to distinguish between socialized medicine, in which the government owns the healthcare
system, and universal healthcare, which is simply a system that guarantees healthcare coverage for everyone.
Germany, Singapore, and Canada all have universal healthcare. People often look to Canada’s universal
healthcare system, Medicare, as a model for the system. In Canada, healthcare is publicly funded and is
administered by the separate provincial and territorial governments. However, the care itself comes from
private providers. This is the main difference between universal healthcare and socialized medicine. The
Canada Health Act of 1970 required that all health insurance plans must be “available to all eligible Canadian
residents, comprehensive in coverage, accessible, portable among provinces, and publicly administered”
(International Health Systems Canada 2010).
Heated discussions about socialization of medicine and managed-care options seem frivolous when compared
with the issues of healthcare systems in developing or underdeveloped countries. In many countries, per
capita income is so low, and governments are so fractured, that healthcare as we know it is virtually non-
existent. Care that people in developed countries take for granted—like hospitals, healthcare workers,
immunizations, antibiotics and other medications, and even sanitary water for drinking and washing—are
unavailable to much of the population. Organizations like Doctors Without Borders, UNICEF, and the World
Health Organization have played an important role in helping these countries get their most basic health
needs met.
FIGURE 19.8 This map shows the countries where malaria is known to occur. In low-income countries, malaria is
still a common cause of death. (Credit: CDC/Wikimedia Commons)
WHO, which is the health arm of the United Nations, set eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in 2000
with the aim of reaching these goals by 2015. Some of the goals deal more broadly with the socioeconomic
factors that influence health, but MDGs 4, 5, and 6 all relate specifically to large-scale health concerns, the likes
of which most people in the United States will never contemplate. MDG 4 is to reduce child mortality, MDG 5
aims to improve maternal health, and MDG 6 strives to combat HIV/AIDS, malaria, and other diseases. The
goals may not seem particularly dramatic, but the numbers behind them show how serious they are.
For MDG 4, the WHO reports that 2009 infant mortality rates in “children under 5 years old in the WHO African
Region (127 per 1000 live births) and in low-income countries (117 per 1000 live births) [had dropped], but
they were still higher than the 1990 global level of 89 per 1000 live births” (World Health Organization 2011).
The fact that these deaths could have been avoided through appropriate medicine and clean drinking water
shows the importance of healthcare.
19 • Health and Medicine

Much progress has been made on MDG 5, with maternal deaths decreasing by 34 percent. However, almost all
maternal deaths occurred in developing countries, with the African region still experiencing high numbers
(World Health Organization 2011).
On MDG 6, the WHO is seeing some decreases in per capita incidence rates of malaria, tuberculosis, HIV/AIDS,
and other diseases. However, the decreases are often offset by population increases (World Health
Organization 2011). Again, the lowest-income countries, especially in the African region, experience the worst
problems with disease. An important component of disease prevention and control is epidemiology, or the
study of the incidence, distribution, and possible control of diseases. Fear of Ebola contamination, primarily in
Western Africa but also to a smaller degree in the United States, became national news in the summer and fall
of 2014.
19.5 Theoretical Perspectives on Health and Medicine
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Apply functionalist, conflict theorist, and interactionist perspectives to health issues
Each of the three major theoretical perspectives approaches the topics of health, illness, and medicine
differently. You may prefer just one of the theories that follow, or you may find that combining theories and
perspectives provides a fuller picture of how we experience health and wellness.
Functionalism
According to the functionalist perspective, health is vital to the stability of the society, and therefore sickness is
a sanctioned form of deviance. Talcott Parsons (1951) was the first to discuss this in terms of the sick role:
patterns of expectations that define appropriate behavior for the sick and for those who take care of them.
According to Parsons, the sick person has a specific role with both rights and responsibilities. To start with, the
sick person has not chosen to be sick and should not be treated as responsible for her condition. The sick
person also has the right of being exempt from normal social roles; they are not required to fulfill the
obligation of a well person and can avoid her normal responsibilities without censure. However, this
exemption is temporary and relative to the severity of the illness. The exemption also requires legitimation by
a physician; that is, a physician must certify that the illness is genuine.
The responsibility of the sick person is twofold: to try to get well and to seek technically competent help from a
physician. If the sick person stays ill longer than is appropriate (malingers), they may be stigmatized.
Parsons argues that since the sick are unable to fulfill their normal societal roles, their sickness weakens the
society. Therefore, it is sometimes necessary for various forms of social control to bring the behavior of a sick
person back in line with normal expectations. In this model of health, doctors serve as gatekeepers, deciding
who is healthy and who is sick—a relationship in which the doctor has all the power. But is it appropriate to
allow doctors so much power over deciding who is sick? And what about people who are sick, but are unwilling
to leave their positions for any number of reasons (personal/social obligations, financial need, or lack of
insurance, for instance).
Conflict Perspective
Theorists using the conflict perspective suggest that issues with the healthcare system, as with most other
social problems, are rooted in capitalist society. According to conflict theorists, capitalism and the pursuit of
profit lead to the commodification of health: the changing of something not generally thought of as a
commodity into something that can be bought and sold in a marketplace. In this view, people with money and
power—the dominant group—are the ones who make decisions about how the healthcare system will be run.
They therefore ensure that they will have healthcare coverage, while simultaneously ensuring that subordinate
groups stay subordinate through lack of access. This creates significant healthcare—and health—disparities
between the dominant and subordinate groups.
19.5 • Theoretical Perspectives on Health and Medicine

Alongside the health disparities created by class inequalities, there are a number of health disparities created
by racism, sexism, ageism, and heterosexism. When health is a commodity, the poor are more likely to
experience illness caused by poor diet, to live and work in unhealthy environments, and are less likely to
challenge the system. In the United States, a disproportionate number of racial minorities also have less
economic power, so they bear a great deal of the burden of poor health. It is not only the poor who suffer from
the conflict between dominant and subordinate groups. For many years now, same-sex couples have been
denied spousal benefits, either in the form of health insurance or in terms of medical responsibility. Further
adding to the issue, doctors hold a disproportionate amount of power in the doctor/patient relationship, which
provides them with extensive social and economic benefits.
While conflict theorists are accurate in pointing out certain inequalities in the healthcare system, they do not
give enough credit to medical advances that would not have been made without an economic structure to
support and reward researchers: a structure dependent on profitability. Additionally, in their criticism of the
power differential between doctor and patient, they are perhaps dismissive of the hard-won medical expertise
possessed by doctors and not patients, which renders a truly egalitarian relationship more elusive.
Symbolic Interactionism
According to theorists working in this perspective, health and illness are both socially constructed. As we
discussed in the beginning of the chapter, interactionists focus on the specific meanings and causes people
attribute to illness. The term medicalization of deviance refers to the process that changes “bad” behavior
into “sick” behavior. A related process is demedicalization, in which “sick” behavior is normalized again.
Medicalization and demedicalization affect who responds to the patient, how people respond to the patient,
and how people view the personal responsibility of the patient (Conrad and Schneider 1992).
FIGURE 19.9 In this engraving from the nineteenth century, “King Alcohol” is shown with a skeleton on a barrel of
alcohol. The words “poverty,” “misery,” “crime,” and “death” hang in the air behind him. (Credit: Library of Congress/
Wikimedia Commons)
An example of medicalization is illustrated by the history of how our society views alcohol and alcoholism.
During the nineteenth century, people who drank too much were considered bad, lazy people. They were
called drunks, and it was not uncommon for them to be arrested or run out of a town. Drunks were not treated
19 • Health and Medicine

in a sympathetic way because, at that time, it was thought that it was their own fault that they could not stop
drinking. During the latter half of the twentieth century, however, people who drank too much were
increasingly defined as alcoholics: people with a disease or a genetic predisposition to addiction who were not
responsible for their drinking. With alcoholism defined as a disease and not a personal choice, alcoholics came
to be viewed with more compassion and understanding. Thus, “badness” was transformed into “sickness.”
There are numerous examples of demedicalization in history as well. During the Civil War era, enslaved people
who escaped from their enslavers were diagnosed with a mental disorder called drapetomania. This has since
been reinterpreted as a completely appropriate response to being enslaved. A more recent example is
homosexuality, which was labeled a mental disorder or a sexual orientation disturbance by the American
Psychological Association until 1973.
While interactionism does acknowledge the subjective nature of diagnosis, it is important to remember who
most benefits when a behavior becomes defined as illness. Pharmaceutical companies make billions treating
illnesses such as fatigue, insomnia, and hyperactivity that may not actually be illnesses in need of treatment,
but opportunities for companies to make more money.
19.5 • Theoretical Perspectives on Health and Medicine

Key Terms
anxiety disorders
feelings of worry and fearfulness that last for months at a time
commodification
the changing of something not generally thought of as a commodity into something that
can be bought and sold in a marketplace
contested illnesses
illnesses that are questioned or considered questionable by some medical
professionals
demedicalization
the social process that normalizes “sick” behavior
disability
a reduction in one’s ability to perform everyday tasks; the World Health Organization notes that
this is a social limitation
epidemiology
the study of the incidence, distribution, and possible control of diseases
impairment
the physical limitations a less-able person faces
individual mandate
a government rule that requires everyone to have insurance coverage or they will have
to pay a penalty
legitimation
the act of a physician certifying that an illness is genuine
medical sociology
the systematic study of how humans manage issues of health and illness, disease and
disorders, and healthcare for both the sick and the healthy
medicalization
the process by which aspects of life that were considered bad or deviant are redefined as
sickness and needing medical attention to remedy
medicalization of deviance
the process that changes “bad” behavior into “sick” behavior
mood disorders
long-term, debilitating illnesses like depression and bipolar disorder
morbidity
the incidence of disease
mortality
the number of deaths in a given time or place
personality disorders
disorders that cause people to behave in ways that are seen as abnormal to society
but seem normal to them
private healthcare
health insurance that a person buys from a private company; private healthcare can
either be employer-sponsored or direct-purchase
public healthcare
health insurance that is funded or provided by the government
sick role
the pattern of expectations that define appropriate behavior for the sick and for those who take
care of them
social epidemiology
the study of the causes and distribution of diseases
socialized medicine
when the government owns and runs the entire healthcare system
stereotype interchangeability
stereotypes that don’t change and that get recycled for application to a new
subordinate group
stigmatization
the act of spoiling someone's identity; they are labeled as different, discriminated against,
and sometimes even shunned due to an illness or disability
stigmatization of illness
illnesses that are discriminated against and whose sufferers are looked down
upon or even shunned by society
underinsured
people who spend at least 10 percent of their income on healthcare costs that are not
covered by insurance
universal healthcare
a system that guarantees healthcare coverage for everyone
Section Summary
19.1 The Social Construction of Health
Medical sociology is the systematic study of how humans manage issues of health and illness, disease and
disorders, and healthcare for both the sick and the healthy. The social construction of health explains how
society shapes and is shaped by medical ideas.
19 • Key Terms

19.2 Global Health
Social epidemiology is the study of the causes and distribution of diseases. From a global perspective, the
health issues of high-income nations tend toward diseases like cancer as well as those that are linked to
obesity, like heart disease, diabetes, and musculoskeletal disorders. Low-income nations are more likely to
contend with cardiovascular disease, infectious disease, high infant mortality rates, scarce medical personnel,
and inadequate water and sanitation systems.
19.3 Health in the United States
Although people in the United States are generally in good health compared to less developed countries, the
United States is still facing challenging issues such as a prevalence of obesity and diabetes. Moreover, people in
the United States of historically disadvantaged racial groups, ethnicities, socioeconomic status, and gender
experience lower levels of healthcare. Mental health and disability are health issues that are significantly
impacted by social norms.
19.4 Comparative Health and Medicine
There are broad, structural differences among the healthcare systems of different countries. In core nations,
those differences include publicly funded healthcare, privately funded healthcare, and combinations of both.
In peripheral and semi-peripheral countries, a lack of basic healthcare administration can be the defining
feature of the system.
19.5 Theoretical Perspectives on Health and Medicine
While the functionalist perspective looks at how health and illness fit into a fully functioning society, the
conflict perspective is concerned with how health and illness fit into the oppositional forces in society. The
interactionist perspective is concerned with how social interactions construct ideas of health and illness.
Section Quiz
19.1 The Social Construction of Health
1. Who determines which illnesses are stigmatized?
a.
Therapists
b.
The patients themselves
c.
Society
d.
All of the above
2. Chronic fatigue syndrome is an example of _______________.
a.
a stigmatized disease
b.
a contested illness
c.
a disability
d.
demedicalization
3. The Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) is an example of ________________
a.
the social construction of health
b.
medicalization
c.
disability accommodations
d.
a contested illness
19 • Section Quiz

19.2 Global Health
4. What is social epidemiology?
a.
The study of why some diseases are stigmatized and others are not
b.
The study of why diseases spread
c.
The study of the mental health of a society
d.
The study of the causes and distribution of diseases
5. Core nations are also known as __________________
a.
high-income nations
b.
newly industrialized nations
c.
low-income nations
d.
developing nations
6. Many deaths in high-income nations are linked to __________________
a.
cancer
b.
obesity
c.
mental illness
d.
lack of clean water
7. According to the World Health Organization, what was the most frequent cause of death for children under
five in low-income countries?
a.
Starvation
b.
Thirst
c.
Pneumonia and diarrheal diseases
d.
All of the above
19.3 Health in the United States
8. Which of the following statements is not true?
a.
The life expectancy of Black males in the United States is approximately five years shorter than for
White males.
b.
The infant mortality rate for Black people in the United States is almost double than it is for White
people
c.
Black people have lower cancer rates than White people.
d.
Hispanic people have worse access to care than non-Hispanic White people.
9. The process by which aspects of life that were considered bad or deviant are redefined as sickness and
needing medical attention to remedy is called:
a.
deviance
b.
medicalization
c.
demedicalization
d.
intersection theory
10. What are the most commonly diagnosed mental disorders in the United States?
a.
ADHD
b.
Mood disorders
c.
Autism spectrum disorders
d.
Anxiety disorders
19 • Section Quiz

11. Sidewalk ramps and Braille signs are examples of _______________.
a.
disabilities
b.
accommodations required by the Americans with Disabilities Act
c.
forms of accessibility for people with disabilities
d.
both b and c
12. The high unemployment rate among people with disabilities may be a result of ____________.
a.
medicalization
b.
obesity
c.
stigmatization
d.
all of the above
19.4 Comparative Health and Medicine
13. Which public healthcare system offers insurance primarily to people over sixty-five years old?
a.
Medicaid
b.
Medicare
c.
Veterans Health Administration
d.
All of the above
14. Which program is an example of socialized medicine?
a.
Canada’s system
b.
The United States’ Veterans Health Administration
c.
The United States’ new system under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
d.
Medicaid
15. What does the individual mandate provision of the 2010 U.S. healthcare reform do?
a.
Requires everyone to buy insurance from the government
b.
Requires everyone to sign up for Medicaid
c.
Requires everyone to have insurance or pay a penalty
d.
None of the above
16. Great Britain’s healthcare system is an example of ______________
a.
socialized medicine
b.
private healthcare
c.
single-payer private healthcare
d.
universal private healthcare
17. What group created the Millennium Development Goals?
a.
UNICEF
b.
The Kaiser Family Foundation
c.
Doctors Without Borders
d.
The World Health Organization
19 • Section Quiz

19.5 Theoretical Perspectives on Health and Medicine
18. Which of the following is not part of the rights and responsibilities of a sick person under the functionalist
perspective?
a.
The sick person is not responsible for his condition.
b.
The sick person must try to get better.
c.
The sick person can take as long as she wants to get better.
d.
The sick person is exempt from the normal duties of society.
19. The class, race, and gender inequalities in our healthcare system support the _____________ perspective.
a.
conflict
b.
interactionist
c.
functionalist
d.
all of the above
20. The removal of homosexuality from the DSM is an example of ____________.
a.
medicalization
b.
deviance
c.
interactionist theory
d.
demedicalization
Short Answer
19.1 The Social Construction of Health
1. Pick a common illness and describe which parts of it are medically constructed, and which parts are
socially constructed.
2. What diseases are the most stigmatized? Which are the least? Is this different in different cultures or social
classes?
19.2 Global Health
3. If social epidemiologists studied the United States in the colonial period, what differences would they find
between now and then?
4. What do you think are some of the contributing factors to obesity-related diseases in the United States?
19.3 Health in the United States
5. What factors contribute to the disparities in health among racial, ethnic, and gender groups in the United
States?
6. Do you know anyone with a mental disorder? How does it affect his or her life?
19.4 Comparative Health and Medicine
7. What do you think are the best and worst parts of the PPACA? Why?
8. Compare and contrast the healthcare system of the United States with the WHO’s Millennium Development
Goals.
19.5 Theoretical Perspectives on Health and Medicine
9. What do you think are the best and worst parts of the PPACA? Why?
10. Compare and contrast the healthcare system of the United States with the WHO’s Millennium
Development Goals.
19 • Short Answer

Further Research
19.1 The Social Construction of Health
Read this article, which discusses the measures nations and people may take to prevent or manage future
pandemics (https://openstax.org/l/pandemics1) . It contains many links to international efforts and studies.
What do you think about our commitment to these steps?
19.2 Global Health
Study this map on global life expectancies (http://openstax.org/l/global_life_expectancies) . What trends do you
notice?
19.3 Health in the United States
People with disabilities, disorders, and neurodiversity are often mistreated even by others who do not know
the best way to act around them. Children with autism experience this continually. Evaluate this guide from
parents of children with autism (https://openstax.org/l/behavior1) to learn more about how to treat and
think about people with autism.
19.4 Comparative Health and Medicine
Project Mosquito Net (http://openstax.org/l/project_mosquito_net) says that mosquito nets sprayed with
insecticide can reduce childhood malaria deaths by half.
19.5 Theoretical Perspectives on Health and Medicine
A massive surge in substance use disorders and overdoses occurred in the United States based on usage of
prescription drugs. The causes were widespread and were rooted in pharmaceutical company approaches,
medical policies, and social causes. Read more in article about the causes of the U.S. opioid crisis
(https://openstax.org/l/substance_disorders) .
References
Introduction
ABC News Health News. "Ebola in America, Timeline of a Deadly Virus." Retrieved Oct. 23rd, 2014
(http://abcnews.go.com/Health/ebola-america-timeline/story?id=26159719).
Centers for Disease Control. 2011b. “Pertussis.” The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved
December 15, 2011 (http://www.cdc.gov/pertussis/outbreaks.html).
Centers for Disease Control. 2020. "What Is Ebola Virus Disease." (https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/about.html)
Conrad, Peter, and Kristin Barker. 2010. “The Social Construction of Illness: Key Insights and Policy
Implications.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 51:67–79.
CNN. 2011. “Retracted Autism Study an 'Elaborate Fraud,' British Journal Finds.” CNN, January 5. Retrieved
December 16, 2011 (http://www.cnn.com/2011/HEALTH/01/05/autism.vaccines/index.html).
Devlin, Kate. 2008. “Measles worry MMR as vaccination rates stall.” The Telegraph, September 24. Retrieved
January 19, 2012 (http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/3074023/Measles-worries-as-MMR-
vaccination-rates-stall.html).
Sugerman, David E., Albert E. Barskey, Maryann G. Delea, Ismael R. Ortega-Sanchez, Daoling Bi, Kimberly J.
Ralston, Paul A. Rota, Karen Waters-Montijo, and Charles W. LeBaron. 2010. “Measles Outbreak in a Highly
Vaccinated Population, San Diego, 2008: Role of the Intentionally Undervaccinated.” Pediatrics
125(4):747–755. Retrieved December 16, 2011 (http://www.pediatricsdigest.mobi/content/125/4/747.full).
World Health Organization. 2014. "Global Alert and Response." Retrieved Oct. 23rd 2014 (http://www.who.int/
19 • Further Research

csr/disease/ebola/en/).
Zacharyczuk, Colleen. 2011. “Myriad causes contributed to California pertussis outbreak.” Thorofar, NJ:
Pediatric Supersite. Retrieved December 16, 2011 (http://www.pediatricsupersite.com/
view.aspx?rid=90516).
19.1 The Social Construction of Health
Begos, Kevin. 2011. “Pinkwashing For Breast Cancer Awareness Questioned.” Retrieved December 16, 2011
(http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/10/11/breast-cancer-pink-pinkwashing_n_1005906.html).
Centers for Disease Control. 2011a. “Perceived Exertion (Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion Scale).” Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved December 12, 2011 (http://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/
everyone/measuring/exertion.html).
Conrad, Peter, and Kristin Barker. 2010. “The Social Construction of Illness: Key Insights and Policy
Implications.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 51:67–79.
Goffman, Erving. 1963. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. London: Penguin.
Hutchison, Courtney. 2010. “Fried Chicken for the Cure?” ABC News Medical Unit. Retrieved December 16,
2011 (http://abcnews.go.com/Health/Wellness/kfc-fights-breast-cancer-fried-chicken/
story?id=10458830#.Tutz63ryT4s).
Sartorius, Norman. 2007. “Stigmatized Illness and Health Care.” The Croatian Medical Journal 48(3):396–397.
Retrieved December 12, 2011 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2080544/).
Think Before You Pink. 2012. “Before You Buy Pink.” Retrieved December 16, 2011
(http://thinkbeforeyoupink.org/?page_id=13).
“Vaccines and Immunizations.” 2011. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved December 16,
2011 (http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/default.htm).
World Health Organization. .n.d. “Definition of Health.” Retrieved December 12, 2011 (http://www.who.int/
about/definition/en/print.html).
World Health Organization: “Health Promotion Glossary Update.” Retrieved December 12, 2011
(http://www.who.int/healthpromotion/about/HPR%20Glossary_New%20Terms.pdf).
19.2 Global Health
Bromet et al. 2011. “Cross-National Epidemiology of DSM-IV Major Depressive Episode.” BMC Medicine 9:90.
Retrieved December 12, 2011 (http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7015/9/90).
Dagenais, Gilles and Darryl P Leong, PhD and Sumathy Rangarajan, MSc and Fernando Lanas, PhD and Prof
Patricio Lopez-Jaramillo, PhD and Prof Rajeev Gupta, PhD. 2019. "Variations in common diseases, hospital
admissions, and deaths in middle-aged adults in 21 countries from five continents (PURE): a prospective
cohort study." September 8 2019. (https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/
PIIS0140-6736(19)32007-0/fulltext#articleInformation)
Hales CM, Carroll MD, Fryar CD, Ogden CL. Prevalence of obesity and severe obesity among adults: United
States, 2017–2018. NCHS Data Brief, no 360. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 2020
Huffman, Wallace E., Sonya Kostova Huffman, AbebayehuTegene, and KyrreRickertsen. 2006. “The Economics
of Obesity-Related Mortality among High Income Countries” International Association of Agricultural
Economists. Retrieved December 12, 2011 (http://purl.umn.edu/25567).
Mahase, Elisabeth. 2019. "Cancer overtakes CVD to become leading cause of death in high income countries"
The BMJ. September 3 2019. (https://www.bmj.com/content/366/bmj.l5368)
19 • References

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. 2011. Health at a Glance 2011: OECD Indicators.
OECD Publishing. Retrieved December 12, 2011 (http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/health_glance-2011-en).
UNICEF. 2011. “Water, Sanitation and Hygiene.” Retrieved December 12, 2011 (http://www.unicef.org/wash).
World Health Organization. 2011. “World Health Statistics 2011.” Retrieved December 12, 2011
(http://www.who.int/gho/publications/world_health_statistics/EN_WHS2011_Part1.pdf).
19.3 Health in the United States
Agency for Health Research and Quality. 2010. “Disparities in Healthcare Quality Among Racial and Ethnic
Minority Groups.” Agency for Health Research and Quality. Retrieved December 13, 2011
(http://www.ahrq.gov/qual/nhqrdr10/nhqrdrminority10.htm)
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 2021 "HCUP Fast Stats. Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project
(HCUP). March 2021. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/faststats/
national/inpatientcommondiagnoses.jsp?year1=2017)
Agency for HealthCare Research and Quality. 2020. "2019 National Healthcare Quality & Disparities Report."
(https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/research/findings/nhqrdr/2019qdr-intro-methods.pdf)
American Psychological Association. 2011a. “A 09 Autism Spectrum Disorder.” American Psychiatric
Association DSM-5 Development. Retrieved December 14, 2011.
American Psychological Association. 2011b. “Personality Traits.” American Psychiatric Association DSM-5
Development. Retrieved December 14, 2011.
American Psychological Association. n.d. “Understanding the Ritalin Debate.” American Psychological
Association. Retrieved December 14, 2011 (http://www.apa.org/topics/adhd/ritalin-debate.aspx)
Anxiety and Depression Institute of America. 2021. "Facts and Statistics." Retrieved April 1 2021.
(https://adaa.org/understanding-anxiety/facts-statistics)
Applied Behavior Analysis. "30 Things Parents of Children on the Autism Spectrum Want You to Know"
(https://www.appliedbehavioranalysisprograms.com/things-parents-of-children-on-the-autism-spectrum-
want-you-to-know/)
Becker, Dana. n.d. “Borderline Personality Disorder: The Disparagement of Women through Diagnosis.”
Retrieved December 13, 2011 (http://www.awpsych.org/
index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=109&catid=74&Itemid=126).
Berkman, Lisa F. 2009. “Social Epidemiology: Social Determinants of Health in the United States: Are We
Losing Ground?” Annual Review of Public Health 30:27–40.
Blumenthal, David, and Sarah R. Collins. 2014 "Health Care Coverage under the Affordable Care Act—a
Progress Report." New England Journal of Medicine 371 (3): 275–81. Retrieved December 16, 2014
(https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/717/04/).
Centers for Disease Control. 2021. "Infant Mortality." (https://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/
maternalinfanthealth/infantmortality.htm)
CHADD. 2021. "ADHD Changes in Adulthood." Children and Adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
Disorder. (https://chadd.org/adhd-weekly/adhd-changes-in-adulthood/)
Danielson, Melissa L. Rebecca H. Bitsko, Reem M. Ghandour, Joseph R. Holbrook, Michael D. Kogan & Stephen
J. Blumberg. 2018. "Prevalence of Parent-Reported ADHD Diagnosis and Associated Treatment Among U.S.
Children and Adolescents, 2016." Journal of Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 47:2, 199-212, DOI:
10.1080/15374416.2017.1417860
19 • References

Fox, B., and D. Worts. 1999. “Revisiting the Critique of Medicalized Childbirth: A Contribution to the Sociology
of Birth.” Gender and Society 13(3):326–346.
Gellene, Denise. 2009. “Sleeping Pill Use Grows as Economy Keeps People up at Night.” Retrieved December
16, 2011 (http://articles.latimes.com/2009/mar/30/health/he-sleep30).
Hines, Susan M., and Kevin J. Thompson. 2007. “Fat Stigmatization in Television Shows and Movies: A Content
Analysis.” Obesity 15:712–718. Retrieved December 15, 2011 (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1038/
oby.2007.635/full).
Institute of Medicine. 2006. Sleep Disorders and Sleep Deprivation: An Unmet Public Health Problem.
Washington DC: National Academies Press.
Jacobs, Gregg D., Edward F. Pace-Schott, Robert Stickgold, and Michael W. Otto. 2004. “Cognitive Behavior
Therapy and Pharmacotherapy for Insomnia: A Randomized Controlled Trial and Direct Comparison.”
Archives of Internal Medicine 164(17):1888–1896. Retrieved December 16, 2011
(http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=217394).
James, Cara et al. 2007. “Key Facts: Race, Ethnicity & Medical Care.” The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
Retrieved December 13, 2011 (http://www.kff.org/minorityhealth/upload/6069-02.pdf).
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2018. "Key Findings From the Kaiser Women's Health Survey. March 13 2018.
(https://www.who.int/data/gho/data/themes/topics/topic-details/GHO/child-mortality)
Keck School of Medicine. 2020. "The Shrinking Child Mortality Rate: 5 Things to Know." Keck School of
Medicine of University of Southern California. (https://mphdegree.usc.edu/blog/the-shrinking-child-
mortality-rate-5-things-to-know/)
Moloney, Mairead Eastin, Thomas R. Konrad, and Catherine R. Zimmer. 2011. “The Medicalization of
Sleeplessness: A Public Health Concern.” American Journal of Public Health 101:1429–1433.
National Alliance on Mental Illness. 2021. "Mental Health By The Numbers." Retrieved April 1, 2021.
(https://www.nami.org/mhstats)
National Institute of Mental Health. 2005. “National Institute of Mental Health Statistics.” Retrieved December
14, 2011 (http://www.nimh.nih.gov/statistics/index.shtml).
National Institutes of Health. 2011a. “Insomnia.” The National Institute of Health. Retrieved December 16,
2011 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/PMH0001808/).
National Institutes of Health. 2011b. “What is Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)?” National Institute of Mental
Health. Retrieved December 14, 2011 (http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/a-parents-guide-to-
autism-spectrum-disorder/what-is-autism-spectrum-disorder-asd.shtml).
National Institute of Mental Health. 2021. "Mental Illness." Retrieved April 1, 2021. (https://www.nimh.nih.gov/
health/statistics/mental-illness.shtml#part_15)
Phelan, Jo C., and Bruce G. Link. 2001. “Conceptualizing Stigma” Annual Review of Sociology 27:363–85.
Retrieved December 13, 2011 (http://www.heart-intl.net/HEART/Legal/Comp/ConceptualizingStigma.pdf).
Phelan, Jo C., and Bruce G. Link. 2003. “When Income Affects Outcome: Socioeconomic Status and Health.”
Research in Profile: 6. Retrieved December 13, 2011 (http://www.investigatorawards.org/downloads/
research_in_profiles_iss06_feb2003.pdf).
Puhl, Rebecca M., and Chelsea A. Heuer. 2009. “The Stigma of Obesity: A Review and Update.” Nature
Publishing Group. Retrieved December 15, 2011 (http://www.yaleruddcenter.org/resources/upload/docs/
what/bias/WeightBiasStudy.pdf).
Ranji, Usha, and Alina Salganico. 2011. “Women's Health Care Chartbook: Key Findings from the Kaiser
19 • References

Women's Health Survey.” The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. Retrieved December 13, 2011
(http://www.kff.org/womenshealth/upload/8164.pdf=).
Scheff, Thomas. 1963. Being Mentally Ill: A Sociological Theory. Chicago, IL: Aldine.
Szasz, Thomas. 1961. The Myth of Mental Illness: Foundations of a Theory of Personal Conduct. New York, NY:
Harper Collins.
U.S. Census Bureau. 2011. “Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2012.” 131st ed. Washington, DC.
Retrieved December 13, 2011 (http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab).
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2011. “Persons with a Disability: Labor Force Characteristics News Release.”
Bureau of Labor Statistics. Retrieved December 14, 2011 (http://www.bls.gov/news.release/disabl.htm).
Wamsley, Laurel. 2021. "American Life Expectancy Dropped by a Full Year in the 1st Half of 2020." National
Public Radio. February 18 2021. (https://www.npr.org/2021/02/18/968791431/american-life-expectancy-
dropped-by-a-full-year-in-the-first-half-of-2020)
Winkleby, Marilyn A., D. E. Jatulis, E. Frank, and S. P. Fortmann. 1992. “Socioeconomic Status and Health: How
Education, Income, and Occupation Contribute to Risk Factors for Cardiovascular Disease.” American
Journal of Public Health 82:6.
World Health Organization. 2020. "Children: Improving Survival and Well-Being." September 8 2020.
(https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/children-reducing-mortality)
World Health Organization. 2021. "Child Mortality." Retrieved April 1 2020. (https://www.who.int/data/gho/
data/themes/topics/topic-details/GHO/child-mortality)
19.4 Comparative Health and Medicine
Anders, George. 1996. Health Against Wealth: HMOs and the Breakdown of Medical Trust. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2014 "Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) Data and
Statistics." Retrieved October 13, 2014 (http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/data.html)
Docteur, Elizabeth, and Robert A. Berenson. 2009. “How Does the Quality of U.S. Health Care Compare
Internationally?” Timely Analysis of Immediate Health Policy Issues 9:1–14.
Economic Policy Institute. 2021. "How would repealing the ACA affect healthcare and jobs in your state?"
(https://www.epi.org/aca-obamacare-repeal-impact/)
Garfield, Rachel and Orgera, Kendal and Damico, Anthony. 2019. "The Uninsured and the ACA: A Primer - Key
Facts about Health Insurance and the Uninsured amidst Changes to the Affordable Care Act" Faiser Family
Foundation. (https://www.kff.org/report-section/the-uninsured-and-the-aca-a-primer-key-facts-about-
health-insurance-and-the-uninsured-amidst-changes-to-the-affordable-care-act-how-many-people-are-
uninsured/)
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2011. “Health Coverage of Children: The Role of Medicaid and CHIP.” Retrieved
December 13, 2011 (http://www.kff.org/uninsured/upload/7698-05.pdf).
Kaiser Family Foundation. 2010. “International Health Systems: Canada.” Retrieved December 14, 2011
(http://www.kaiseredu.org/Issue-Modules/International-Health-Systems/Canada.aspx).
Keisler-Starkey, Katherine and Bunch, Lisa. 2020. "Health Insurance Coverage In the United States 2019."
United States Census Bureau. (https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2020/demo/p60-271.html)
Keith, Katie. 2020. "Tracking the uninsured rate in 2019-20." Health Affairs. October 7 2020.
(https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hblog20201007.502559/full/)
19 • References

Klein, Ezra. 2009. “Health Reform for Beginners: The Difference between Socialized Medicine, Single-Payer
Health Care, and What We'll Be Getting.” The Washington Post, December 14. Retrieved December 15, 2011
(http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2011-12-15/don-t-let-death-panels-kill-a-better-way-to-die-
commentary-by-ezra-klein.html).
Kogan, Richard. 2011. “Program Cuts Under a Balanced Budget Amendment: How Severe Might They Be?”
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Retrieved December 15, 2011 (http://www.cbpp.org/
cms/?fa=view&id=3619).
Pear, Robert. 2011. “In Cuts to Health Programs, Experts See Difficult Task in Protecting Patients.” The New
York Times, September 20. Retrieved December 13, 2011 (http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/21/us/politics/
wielding-the-ax-on-medicaid-and-medicare-without-wounding-the-patient.html).
Rooney, Kate and Moyer, Liz. 2018. "Health care topped the economy as the biggest issue for voters now, here’s
why." CNBC. November 8, 2018. (https://www.cnbc.com/2018/11/07/healthcare-topped-the-economy-as-
the-biggest-issue-for-voters-now-heres-why.html)
Schoen, C., M.M. Doty, R.H. Robertson, and S.R. Collins. 2011. "Affordable Care Act Reforms Could Reduce the
Number of Underinsured U.S. Adults by 70 Percent." Health Affairs 30(9):1762–71. Retrieved December 13,
2011 (http://www.commonwealthfund.org/Publications/In-the-Literature/2011/Sep/Reduce-
Uninsured.aspx).
Uchiyma, T., M. Kurosawa, Y. Inaba. 2007. "MMR-Vaccine and Regression in Autism Spectrum Disorders:
Negative Results Presented from Japan." Journal of Autism and Deviant Disorders 37(2):210–7.
U.S. Census. 2011. “Coverage by Type of Health Insurance: 2009 and 2010.” U.S. Census Bureau, Current
Population Survey, 2010 and 2011 Annual Social and Economic Supplements. Retrieved December 13, 2011
(http://www.census.gov/hhes/www/hlthins/data/incpovhlth/2010/table10.pdf).
U.S. Census. 2011. “CPS Health Insurance Definitions.” Retrieved December 13, 2011 (http://www.census.gov/
hhes/www/hlthins/methodology/definitions/cps.html).
Washington University Center for Health Policy. n.d. “Health Care Access for Medicaid Patients—Physicians
and Dentists Interview Study.” Retrieved December 15, 2011 (http://healthpolicy.wustl.edu/Content/
HealthCareAccess.html?OpenDocument).
World Health Organization. 2011. “World Health Statistics 2011.” Retrieved December 12, 2011
(http://www.who.int/gho/publications/world_health_statistics/EN_WHS2011_Part1.pdf).
World Health Organization. 2014. "Ebola Virus Disease Fact Sheet, Updated September 2014." Retrieved
October 19, 2014 (http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs103/en/).
19.5 Theoretical Perspectives on Health and Medicine
Conrad, Peter, and Joseph W. Schneider. 1992. Deviance and Medicalization: From Badness to Sickness.
Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press
Parsons, Talcott. 1951. The Social System. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Scheff, Thomas. 1963. “The Role of the Mentally Ill and the Dynamics of Mental Disorder.” Sociometry
26:436–453.
19 • References

FIGURE 20.1 A view from space makes it easy to see differences in population. Lighted areas are urban centers,
containing larger and larger portions of the world’s population. Darker areas are sparsely populated. Beyond the
global scale, the differences within regions is notable. Africa is mostly empty of lights with the exception of a few
densely populated areas to the south, west, and north. India is almost clearly outlined by its lights, showing a stark
contrast with the nations to its north and west, with a line of light indicating the cities along the Indus River in
Pakistan. The United States almost seems to be split in half at the line formed by Dallas, Oklahoma City, and
Wichita. (Credit NASA Goddard Space Flight Center)
INTRODUCTION