FIGURE 21.1 Activism can take the form of enormous marches, violent clashes, fundraising, social media activity, 
or silent displays. In this 2016 photo, people wear hoods and prison jumpsuits to protest the conditions at 
Guantanamo Bay Prison, where suspected terrorists had been held for over a decade without trial and without the 
rights of most people being held for suspicion of crimes. (Credit: Debra Sweet/flickr)
INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL MOVEMENTS AND SOCIAL CHANGE
CHAPTER OUTLINE
21.1 Collective Behavior
21.2 Social Movements
21.3 Social Change
When considering social movements, the
images that come to mind are often the most dramatic and dynamic: the Boston Tea Party, Martin Luther
King's speech at the 1963 March on Washington, anti-war protesters putting flowers in soldiers' rifles, and
Gloria Richardson brushing away a bayonet in Cambridge, Maryland. Or perhaps more violent visuals: burning
buildings in Watts, protestors fighting with police, or a lone citizen facing a line of tanks in Tiananmen Square.
But social movement occurs every day, often without any pictures or fanfare, by people of all backgrounds and
ages. Organizing an awareness event, volunteering at a shelter, donating to a cause, speaking at a school board
meeting, running for office, or writing an article are all ways that people participate in or promote social
movements. Some people drive social change by educating themselves through books or trainings. Others find
one person to help at a time.
Occupy Wall Street (OWS) was a unique movement that defied some of the theoretical and practical
expectations regarding social movements. OWS is set apart by its lack of a single message, its leaderless
organization, and its target—financial institutions instead of the government. OWS baffled much of the public,
and certainly the media, leading many to ask, "Who are they, and what do they want?"
Social Movements and Social
Change

On July 13, 2011, the organization Adbusters posted on its blog, "Are you ready for a Tahrir moment? On
September 17th, flood into lower Manhattan, set up tents, kitchens, peaceful barricades and occupy Wall
Street" (Castells 2012).
The "Tahrir moment" was a reference to the 2010 political uprising that began in Tunisia and spread
throughout the Middle East and North Africa, including Egypt’s Tahrir Square in Cairo. Although OWS was a
reaction to the continuing financial chaos that resulted from the 2008 market meltdown and not a political
movement, the Arab Spring was its catalyst.
Manuel Castells (2012) notes that the years leading up to the Occupy movement had witnessed a dizzying
increase in the disparity of wealth in the United States, stemming back to the 1980s. The top 1 percent in the
nation had secured 58 percent of the economic growth in the period for themselves, while real hourly wages
for the average worker had increased by only 2 percent. The wealth of the top 5 percent had increased by 42
percent. The average pay of a CEO was at that time 350 times that of the average worker, compared to less than
50 times in 1983 (AFL-CIO 2014). The country’s leading financial institutions, to many clearly to blame for the
crisis and dubbed "too big to fail," were in trouble after many poorly qualified borrowers defaulted on their
mortgage loans when the loans’ interest rates rose. The banks were eventually "bailed" out by the government
with $700 billion of taxpayer money. According to many reports, that same year top executives and traders
received large bonuses.
On September 17, 2011, an anniversary of the signing of the U.S. Constitution, the occupation began. About
one thousand protestors descended upon Wall Street, and up to 20,000 people moved into Zuccotti Park, only
two blocks away, where they began building a village of tents and organizing a system of communication. The
protest soon began spreading throughout the nation, and its members started calling themselves "the 99
percent." More than a thousand cities and towns had Occupy demonstrations.
What did they want? Castells has dubbed OWS "A non-demand movement: The process is the message." Using
Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, and live-stream video, the protesters conveyed a multifold message with a long list
of reforms and social change, including the need to address the rising disparity of wealth, the influence of
money on election outcomes, the notion of "corporate personhood," a corporatized political system (to be
replaced by "direct democracy”), political favoring of the rich, and rising student debt.
What did they accomplish? Despite headlines at the time softly mocking OWS for lack of cohesion and lack of
clear messaging, the movement is credited with bringing attention to income inequality and the seemingly
preferential treatment of financial institutions accused of wrongdoing. Recall from the chapter on Crime and
Deviance that many financial crimes are not prosecuted, and their perpetrators rarely face jail time. It is likely
that the general population is more sensitive to those issues than they were before the Occupy and related
movements made them more visible.
What is the long-term impact? Has the United States changed the way it manages inequality? Certainly not. As
discussed in several chapters, income inequality has generally increased. But is a major shift in our future?
The late James C. Davies suggested in his 1962 paper, "Toward a Theory of Revolution" that major change
depends upon the mood of the people, and that it is extremely unlikely those in absolute poverty will be able to
overturn a government, simply because the government has infinitely more power.
Instead, a shift is more possible when those with more power become involved. When formerly prosperous
people begin to have unmet needs and unmet expectations, they become more disturbed: their mood changes.
Eventually an intolerable point is reached, and revolution occurs. Thus, change comes not from the very
bottom of the social hierarchy, but from somewhere in the middle (Davies 1962). For example, the Arab Spring
was driven by mostly young, educated people whose promise and expectations were thwarted by corrupt
autocratic governments. OWS too came not from the bottom but from people in the middle, who exploited the
power of social media to enhance communication.
21 • Social Movements and Social Change

21.1 Collective Behavior
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Describe different forms of collective behavior
•
Differentiate between types of crowds
•
Discuss emergent norm, value-added, and assembling perspective analyses of collective behavior
Flash Mobs and Challenges
FIGURE 21.2 Is this a good time had by all? Some flash mobs may function as political protests, while others are for
fun. (Credit Richard Wood/flickr)
In March 2014, a group of musicians got together in a fish market in Odessa for a spontaneous performance of
Beethoven's “Ode to Joy” from his Ninth Symphony. While tensions were building over Ukraine's efforts to join the
European Union, and even as Russian troops had taken control of the Ukrainian airbase in Belbek, the Odessa
Philharmonic Orchestra and Opera Chorus tried to lighten the troubled times for shoppers with music and song.
Spontaneous gatherings like this are called flash mobs. They are often recorded or live streamed, and are
sometimes planned to celebrate an event or person.
While flash mobs are often intensely designed and rehearsed in order to give the impression of spontaneity,
challenges don't always go according to plan: Cinnamon is too intense, buckets may fall on people's heads, or a
bottle breaks on the floor. But successes and failures on social media can tie people together. Challenges can lead to
chats, recollections, and repeats.
Humans seek connections and shared experiences. Perhaps experiencing a flash mob event enhances this bond. It
certainly interrupts our otherwise mundane routine with a reminder that we are social animals.
Forms of Collective Behavior
Flash mobs are examples of collective behavior, noninstitutionalized activity in which several or many people
voluntarily engage. Other examples are a group of commuters traveling home from work and a population of
teens adopting a favorite singer’s hairstyle. In short, collective behavior is any group behavior that is not
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
21.1 • Collective Behavior

mandated or regulated by an institution. There are three primary forms of collective behavior: the crowd, the
mass, and the public.
It takes a fairly large number of people in close proximity to form a crowd (Lofland 1993). Examples include a
group of people attending an Ani DiFranco concert, tailgating at a Patriots game, or attending a worship
service. Turner and Killian (1993) identified four types of crowds. Casual crowds consist of people who are in
the same place at the same time but who aren’t really interacting, such as people standing in line at the post
office. Conventional crowds are those who come together for a scheduled event that occurs regularly, like a
religious service. Expressive crowds are people who join together to express emotion, often at funerals,
weddings, or the like. The final type, acting crowds, focuses on a specific goal or action, such as a protest
movement or riot.
In addition to the different types of crowds, collective groups can also be identified in two other ways. A mass is
a relatively large number of people with a common interest, though they may not be in close proximity
(Lofland 1993), such as players of the popular Facebook game Farmville. A public, on the other hand, is an
unorganized, relatively diffused group of people who share ideas, such as the Libertarian political party. While
these two types of crowds are similar, they are not the same. To distinguish between them, remember that
members of a mass share interests, whereas members of a public share ideas.
Theoretical Perspectives on Collective Behavior
Early collective behavior theories (LeBon 1895; Blumer 1969) focused on the irrationality of crowds.
Eventually, those theorists who viewed crowds as uncontrolled groups of irrational people were supplanted by
theorists who viewed the behavior some crowds engaged in as the rational behavior of logical beings.
Emergent-Norm Perspective
FIGURE 21.3 According to the emergent-norm perspective, Hurricane Katrina victims sought needed supplies for
survival, but to some outsiders their behavior was normally seen as looting. (Credit: Infrogmation/Wikimedia
Commons)
Sociologists Ralph Turner and Lewis Killian (1993) built on earlier sociological ideas and developed what is
known as emergent norm theory. They believe that the norms experienced by people in a crowd may be
disparate and fluctuating. They emphasize the importance of these norms in shaping crowd behavior,
especially those norms that shift quickly in response to changing external factors. Emergent norm theory
asserts that, in this circumstance, people perceive and respond to the crowd situation with their particular
(individual) set of norms, which may change as the crowd experience evolves. This focus on the individual
component of interaction reflects a symbolic interactionist perspective.
For Turner and Killian, the process begins when individuals suddenly find themselves in a new situation, or
when an existing situation suddenly becomes strange or unfamiliar. For example, think about human behavior
during Hurricane Katrina. New Orleans was decimated and people were trapped without supplies or a way to
evacuate. In these extraordinary circumstances, what outsiders saw as “looting” was defined by those involved
21 • Social Movements and Social Change

as seeking needed supplies for survival. Normally, individuals would not wade into a corner gas station and
take canned goods without paying, but given that they were suddenly in a greatly changed situation, they
established a norm that they felt was reasonable.
Once individuals find themselves in a situation ungoverned by previously established norms, they interact in
small groups to develop new guidelines on how to behave. According to the emergent-norm perspective,
crowds are not viewed as irrational, impulsive, uncontrolled groups. Instead, norms develop and are accepted
as they fit the situation. While this theory offers insight into why norms develop, it leaves undefined the nature
of norms, how they come to be accepted by the crowd, and how they spread through the crowd.
Value-Added Theory
Neil Smelser’s (1962) meticulous categorization of crowd behavior, called value-added theory, is a perspective
within the functionalist tradition based on the idea that several conditions must be in place for collective
behavior to occur. Each condition adds to the likelihood that collective behavior will occur. The first condition
is structural conduciveness, which occurs when people are aware of the problem and have the opportunity to
gather, ideally in an open area. Structural strain, the second condition, refers to people’s expectations about
the situation at hand being unmet, causing tension and strain. The next condition is the growth and spread of a
generalized belief, wherein a problem is clearly identified and attributed to a person or group.
Fourth, precipitating factors spur collective behavior; this is the emergence of a dramatic event. The fifth
condition is mobilization for action, when leaders emerge to direct a crowd to action. The final condition
relates to action by the agents. Called social control, it is the only way to end the collective behavior episode
(Smelser 1962).
A real-life example of these conditions occurred after the fatal police shooting of teenager Michael Brown, an
unarmed eighteen-year-old African American, in Ferguson, MO on August 9, 2014. The shooting drew national
attention almost immediately. A large group of mostly Black, local residents assembled in protest—a classic
example of structural conduciveness. When the community perceived that the police were not acting in the
people's interest and were withholding the name of the officer, structural strain became evident. A growing
generalized belief evolved as the crowd of protesters were met with heavily armed police in military-style
protective uniforms accompanied by an armored vehicle. The precipitating factor of the arrival of the police
spurred greater collective behavior as the residents mobilized by assembling a parade down the street.
Ultimately they were met with tear gas, pepper spray, and rubber bullets used by the police acting as agents of
social control. The element of social control escalated over the following days until August 18, when the
governor called in the National Guard.
21.1 • Collective Behavior

FIGURE 21.4 Agents of social control bring collective behavior to an end. (Credit: hozinja/flickr)
Assembling Perspective
Interactionist sociologist Clark McPhail (1991) developed assembling perspective, another system for
understanding collective behavior that credited individuals in crowds as rational beings. Unlike previous
theories, this theory refocuses attention from collective behavior to collective action. Remember that collective
behavior is a noninstitutionalized gathering, whereas collective action is based on a shared interest. McPhail’s
theory focused primarily on the processes associated with crowd behavior, plus the lifecycle of gatherings. He
identified several instances of convergent or collective behavior, as shown on the chart below.
Type of crowd
Description
Example
Convergence
clusters
Family and friends who travel together
Carpooling parents take several children
to the movies
Convergent
orientation
Group all facing the same direction
A semi-circle around a stage
Collective
vocalization
Sounds or noises made collectively
Screams on a roller coaster
Collective
verbalization
Collective and simultaneous participation in a
speech or song
Pledge of Allegiance in the school
classroom
Collective
gesticulation
Body parts forming symbols
The YMCA dance
Collective
manipulation
Objects collectively moved around
Holding signs at a protest rally
TABLE 21.1 Clark McPhail identified various circumstances of convergent and collective behavior (McPhail 1991).
21 • Social Movements and Social Change

Type of crowd
Description
Example
Collective
locomotion
The direction and rate of movement to the
event
Children running to an ice cream truck
TABLE 21.1 Clark McPhail identified various circumstances of convergent and collective behavior (McPhail 1991).
As useful as this is for understanding the components of how crowds come together, many sociologists criticize
its lack of attention on the large cultural context of the described behaviors, instead focusing on individual
actions.
21.2 Social Movements
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Demonstrate awareness of social movements on a state, national, and global level
•
Distinguish between different types of social movements
•
Identify stages of social movements
•
Discuss theoretical perspectives on social movements, like resource mobilization, framing, and new social
movement theory
Social movements are purposeful, organized groups that strive to work toward a common social goal. While
most of us learned about social movements in history classes, we tend to take for granted the fundamental
changes they caused —and we may be completely unfamiliar with the trend toward global social movements.
But from the antitobacco movement that has worked to outlaw smoking in public buildings and raise the cost
of cigarettes, to political uprisings throughout the Arab world, movements are creating social change on a
global scale.
Levels of Social Movements
Movements happen in our towns, in our nation, and around the world. Let’s take a look at examples of social
movements, from local to global. No doubt you can think of others on all of these levels, especially since
modern technology has allowed us a near-constant stream of information about the quest for social change
around the world.
FIGURE 21.5 Staff at University of Wisconsin protest a proposed law that would significantly reduce their ability to
bargain for better pay and benfits. (Credit: marctasman/flickr)
21.2 • Social Movements

Local
Local social movements typically refer to those in cities or towns, but they can also affect smaller
constituencies, such as college campuses. Sometimes colleges are smaller hubs of a national movement, as
seen during the Vietnam War protests or the Black Lives Matter protests. Other times, colleges are managing a
more local issue. In 2012, The Cooper Union in New York City announced that, due to financial
mismanagement and unforeseen downturns from the Great Recession, the college had a massive shortfall; it
would be forced to charge tuition for the first time. To students at most other colleges, tuition would not seem
out of line, but Cooper Union was founded (and initially funded) under the principle that it would not charge
tuition. When the school formally announced the plan to charge tuition, students occupied a building and,
later, the college president's office. Student action eventually contributed to the president's resignation and a
financial recovery plan in partnership with the state attorney general.
Another example occurred in Wisconsin. After announcing a significant budget shortfall, Governor Scott
Walker put forth a financial repair bill that would reduce the collective bargaining abilities of unions and other
organizations in the state. (Collective bargaining was used to attain workplace protections, benefits,
healthcare, and fair pay.) Faculty at the state's college system were not in unions, but teaching assistants,
researchers, and other staff had regularly collectively bargained. Faced with the prospect of reduced job
protections, pay, and benefits, the staff members began one of the earliest protests against Walker's action, by
protesting on campus and sending an ironic message of love to the governor on Valentine's Day. Over time,
these efforts would spread to other organizations in the state.
State
FIGURE 21.6 Texas Secede! is an organization which would like Texas to secede from the United States. (Credit:
Tim Pearce/flickr)
The most impactful state-level protest would be to cease being a state, and organizations in several states are
working toward that goal. Texas secession has been a relatively consistent movement since about 1990. The
past decade has seen an increase in rhetoric and campaigns to drive interest and support for a public
referendum (a direct vote on the matter by the people). The Texas Nationalist Movement, Texas Secede!, and
other groups have provided formal proposals and programs designed to make the idea seem more feasible.
Texit has become a widely used nickname and hashtag for the movement. And in February 2021, a bill was
introduced to hold a referendum that would begin formal discussions on creating an independent
21 • Social Movements and Social Change

nation—though the bill's sponsor indicated that it was mainly intended to begin conversation and evaluations
rather than directly lead to secession (De Alba 2021).
States also get involved before and after national decisions. The legalization of same-sex marriage throughout
the United States led some people to feel their religious beliefs were under attack. Following swiftly upon the
heels of the Supreme Court Obergefell ruling, the Indiana legislature passed a Religious Freedom Restoration
Act (RFRA, pronounced "rifra"). Originally crafted decades ago with the purpose of preserving the rights of
minority religious people, more recent RFRA laws allow individuals, businesses, and other organizations to
decide whom they will serve based on religious beliefs. For example, Arkansas's 2021 law allowed doctors to
refuse to treat patients based on the doctor's religious beliefs (Associated Press 2021). In this way, state-level
organizations and social movements are responding to a national decision.
FIGURE 21.7 At the time of this writing, more than thirty states and the District of Columbia allow marriage for
same-sex couples. State constitutional bans are more difficult to overturn than mere state bans because of the
higher threshold of votes required to change a constitution. Now that the Supreme Court has stricken a key part of
the Defense of Marriage Act, same-sex couples married in states that allow it are now entitled to federal benefits
afforded to heterosexual couples (CNN 2014). (Credit: Jose Antonio Navas/flickr).
Global
Social organizations worldwide take stands on such general areas of concern as poverty, sex trafficking, and
the use of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in food. Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) are
sometimes formed to support such movements, such as the International Federation of Organic Agriculture
Movement (FOAM). Global efforts to reduce poverty are represented by the Oxford Committee for Famine
Relief (OXFAM), among others. The Fair Trade movement exists to protect and support food producers in
developing countries. Occupy Wall Street, although initially a local movement, also went global throughout
Europe and, as the chapter’s introductory photo shows, the Middle East.
Types of Social Movements
We know that social movements can occur on the local, national, or even global stage. Are there other patterns
or classifications that can help us understand them? Sociologist David Aberle (1966) addresses this question
by developing categories that distinguish among social movements based on what they want to change and
how much change they want. Reform movements seek to change something specific about the social
structure. Examples include antinuclear groups, Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD), the Dreamers
movement for immigration reform, and the Human Rights Campaign’s advocacy for Marriage Equality.
Revolutionary movements seek to completely change every aspect of society. These include the 1960s
counterculture movement, including the revolutionary group The Weather Underground, as well as anarchist
collectives. Texas Secede! is a revolutionary movement. Religious/Redemptive movements are “meaning
seeking,” and their goal is to provoke inner change or spiritual growth in individuals. Organizations pushing
these movements include Heaven’s Gate or the Branch Davidians. The latter is still in existence despite
21.2 • Social Movements

government involvement that led to the deaths of numerous Branch Davidian members in 1993. Alternative
movements are focused on self-improvement and limited, specific changes to individual beliefs and behavior.
These include trends like transcendental meditation or a macrobiotic diet. Resistance movements seek to
prevent or undo change to the social structure. The Ku Klux Klan, the Minutemen, and pro-life movements fall
into this category.
Stages of Social Movements
Later sociologists studied the lifecycle of social movements—how they emerge, grow, and in some cases, die
out. Blumer (1969) and Tilly (1978) outline a four-stage process. In the preliminary stage, people become
aware of an issue, and leaders emerge. This is followed by the coalescence stage when people join together and
organize in order to publicize the issue and raise awareness. In the institutionalization stage, the movement no
longer requires grassroots volunteerism: it is an established organization, typically with a paid staff. When
people fall away and adopt a new movement, the movement successfully brings about the change it sought, or
when people no longer take the issue seriously, the movement falls into the decline stage. Each social
movement discussed earlier belongs in one of these four stages. Where would you put them on the list?
Social Media and Social Movements
FIGURE 21.8 Are these activists most likely to have a larger impact through people who see their sign from the
shore, or through people who will see pictures of their event on social media? (Credit: Backbone Campaign/flickr)
As we have mentioned throughout this text, and likely as you have experienced in your life, social media is a
widely used mechanism in social movements. In the Groups and Organizations chapter, we discussed Tarana
Burke first using "Me Too" in 2006 on a major social media venue of the time (MySpace). The phrase later grew
into a massive movement when people began using it on Twitter to drive empathy and support regarding
experiences of sexual harassment or sexual assault. In a similar way, Black Lives Matter began as a social
media message after George Zimmerman was acquitted in the shooting death of 17-year-old Trayvon Martin,
and the phrase burgeoned into a formalized (though decentralized) movement in subsequent years.
Social media has the potential to dramatically transform how people get involved in movements ranging from
21 • Social Movements and Social Change

local school district decisions to presidential campaigns. As discussed above, movements go through several
stages, and social media adds a dynamic to each of them. In the the preliminary stage, people become aware of
an issue, and leaders emerge. Compared to movements of 20 or 30 years ago, social media can accelerate this
stage substantially. Issue awareness can spread at the speed of a click, with thousands of people across the
globe becoming informed at the same time. In a similar vein, those who are savvy and engaged with social
media may emerge as leaders, even if, for example, they are not great public speakers.
At the next stage, the coalescence stage, social media is also transformative. Coalescence is the point when
people join together to publicize the issue and get organized. President Obama’s 2008 campaign was a case
study in organizing through social media. Using Twitter and other online tools, the campaign engaged
volunteers who had typically not bothered with politics. Combined with comprehensive data tracking and the
ability to micro-target, the campaign became a blueprint for others to build on. The 2020 elections featured a
level of data analysis and rapid response capabilities that, while echoing the Obama campaign's early work,
made the 2008 campaign look quaint. The campaigns and political analysts could measure the level of social
media interaction following any campaign stop, debate, statement by the candidate, news mention, or any
other event, and measure whether the tone or "sentiment" was positive or negative. Political polls are still
important, but social media provides instant feedback and opportunities for campaigns to act, react, or—on a
daily basis—ask for donations based on something that had occurred just hours earlier (Knowledge at Wharton
2020).
Interestingly, social media can have interesting outcomes once a movement reaches the institutionalization
stage. In some cases, a formal organization might exist alongside the hashtag or general sentiment, as is the
case with Black Lives Matter. At any one time, BLM is essentially three things: a structured organization, an
idea with deep and personal meaning for people, and a widely used phrase or hashtag. It's possible that users
of the hashtag are not referring to the formal organization. It's even possible that people who hold a strong
belief that Black lives matter do not agree with all of the organization's principles or its leadership. And in
other cases, people may be very aligned with all three contexts of the phrase. Social media is still crucial to the
social movement, but its interplay is both complex and evolving.
In a similar way, MeToo activists, including Tarana Burke herself, have sought to clarify the interweaving of
different aspects of the movement. She told the Harvard Gazette in 2020:
I think we have to be careful about what we’re calling the movement. And I think one of the things I’ve
learned in the last two years is that folks don’t really understand what a movement is or how it’s
defined. The people using the hashtag on the internet were the impetus for Me Too being put into the
public sphere. The media coverage of the viralness of Me Too and the people being accused are media
coverage of a popular story that derived from the hashtag. The movement is the work that our
organization and others like us are doing to both support survivors and move people to action (Walsh
2020).
Sociologists have identified high-risk activism, such as the civil rights movement, as a “strong-tie”
phenomenon, meaning that people are far more likely to stay engaged and not run home to safety if they have
close friends who are also engaged. The people who dropped out of the movement—who went home after the
danger became too great—did not display any less ideological commitment. But they lacked the strong-tie
connection to other people who were staying. Social media had been considered “weak-tie” (McAdam 1993
and Brown 2011). People follow or friend people they have never met. Weak ties are important for our social
structure, but they seemed to limit the level of risk we’ll take on their behalf. For some people, social media
remains that way, but for others it can relate to or build stronger ties. For example, if people, who had for years
known each other only through an online group, meet in person at an event, they may feel far more connected
at that event and afterward than people who had never interacted before. And as we discussed in the Groups
chapter, social media itself, even if people never meet, can bring people into primary group status, forming
stronger ties.
21.2 • Social Movements

Another way to consider the impact of social media on activism is through something that may or may not be
emotional, has little implications regarding tie strength, and may be fleeting rather than permanent, but still
be one of the largest considerations of any formal social movement: money. Returning to politics, think of the
massive amounts of campaign money raised in each election cycle through social media. In the 2020
Presidential election and its aftermath, hundreds of millions of dollars were raised through social media.
Likewise, 55 percent of people who engage with nonprofits through social media take some sort of action; and
for 60 percent of them (or 33 percent of the total) that action is to give money to support the cause (Nonprofit
Source 2020).
Theoretical Perspectives on Social Movements
Most theories of social movements are called collective action theories, indicating the purposeful nature of this
form of collective behavior. The following three theories are but a few of the many classic and modern theories
developed by social scientists.
Resource Mobilization
McCarthy and Zald (1977) conceptualize resource mobilization theory as a way to explain movement success
in terms of the ability to acquire resources and mobilize individuals. Resources are primarily time and money,
and the more of both, the greater the power of organized movements. Numbers of social movement
organizations (SMOs), which are single social movement groups, with the same goals constitute a social
movement industry (SMI). Together they create what McCarthy and Zald (1977) refer to as "the sum of all social
movements in a society."
Resource Mobilization and the Civil Rights Movement
An example of resource mobilization theory is activity of the civil rights movement in the decade between the
mid 1950s and the mid 1960s. Social movements had existed before, notably the Women's Suffrage Movement
and a long line of labor movements, thus constituting an existing social movement sector, which is the
multiple social movement industries in a society, even if they have widely varying constituents and goals. The
civil rights movement had also existed well before Rosa Parks refused to give up her bus seat to a white man.
Less known is that Parks was a member of the NAACP and trained in leadership (A&E Television Networks,
LLC. 2014). But her action that day was spontaneous and unplanned (Schmitz 2014). Her arrest triggered a
public outcry that led to the famous Montgomery bus boycott, turning the movement into what we now think of
as the "civil rights movement" (Schmitz 2014).
Mobilization had to begin immediately. Boycotting the bus made other means of transportation necessary,
which was provided through car pools. Churches and their ministers joined the struggle, and the protest
organization In Friendship was formed as well as The Friendly Club and the Club From Nowhere. A social
movement industry, which is the collection of the social movement organizations that are striving toward
similar goals, was growing.
Martin Luther King Jr. emerged during these events to become the charismatic leader of the movement, gained
respect from elites in the federal government, and aided by even more emerging SMOs such as the Student
Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), the National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC),
among others. Several still exist today. Although the movement in that period was an overall success, and laws
were changed (even if not attitudes), the "movement" continues. So do struggles to keep the gains that were
made, even as the U.S. Supreme Court has recently weakened the Voter Rights Act of 1965, once again making
it more difficult for Black Americans and other minorities to vote.
21 • Social Movements and Social Change

FIGURE 21.9 Multiple social movement organizations concerned about the same issue form a social movement
industry. A society’s many social movement industries comprise its social movement sector. With so many options,
to whom will you give your time and money?
Framing/Frame Analysis
Over the past several decades, sociologists have developed the concept of frames to explain how individuals
identify and understand social events and which norms they should follow in any given situation (Goffman
1974; Snow et al. 1986; Benford and Snow 2000). Imagine entering a restaurant. Your “frame” immediately
provides you with a behavior template. It probably does not occur to you to wear pajamas to a fine-dining
establishment, throw food at other patrons, or spit your drink onto the table. However, eating food at a
sleepover pizza party provides you with an entirely different behavior template. It might be perfectly
acceptable to eat in your pajamas and maybe even throw popcorn at others or guzzle drinks from cans.
Successful social movements use three kinds of frames (Snow and Benford 1988) to further their goals. The
first type, diagnostic framing, states the problem in a clear, easily understood way. When applying diagnostic
frames, there are no shades of gray: instead, there is the belief that what “they” do is wrong and this is how
“we” will fix it. The anti-gay marriage movement is an example of diagnostic framing with its uncompromising
insistence that marriage is only between a man and a woman. Prognostic framing, the second type, offers a
solution and states how it will be implemented. Some examples of this frame, when looking at the issue of
marriage equality as framed by the anti-gay marriage movement, include the plan to restrict marriage to “one
man/one woman” or to allow only “civil unions” instead of marriages. As you can see, there may be many
competing prognostic frames even within social movements adhering to similar diagnostic frames. Finally,
motivational framing is the call to action: what should you do once you agree with the diagnostic frame and
believe in the prognostic frame? These frames are action-oriented. In the gay marriage movement, a call to
action might encourage you to vote “no” on Proposition 8 in California (a move to limit marriage to male-
female couples), or conversely, to contact your local congressperson to express your viewpoint that marriage
should be restricted to male-female couples.
With so many similar diagnostic frames, some groups find it best to join together to maximize their impact.
When social movements link their goals to the goals of other social movements and merge into a single group,
a frame alignment process (Snow et al. 1986) occurs—an ongoing and intentional means of recruiting
participants to the movement.
This frame alignment process has four aspects: bridging, amplification, extension, and transformation.
21.2 • Social Movements

Bridging describes a “bridge” that connects uninvolved individuals and unorganized or ineffective groups with
social movements that, though structurally unconnected, nonetheless share similar interests or goals. These
organizations join together to create a new, stronger social movement organization. Can you think of examples
of different organizations with a similar goal that have banded together?
In the amplification model, organizations seek to expand their core ideas to gain a wider, more universal
appeal. By expanding their ideas to include a broader range, they can mobilize more people for their cause. For
example, the Slow Food movement extends its arguments in support of local food to encompass reduced
energy consumption, pollution, obesity from eating more healthfully, and more.
In extension, social movements agree to mutually promote each other, even when the two social movement
organization’s goals don’t necessarily relate to each other’s immediate goals. This often occurs when
organizations are sympathetic to each others’ causes, even if they are not directly aligned, such as women’s
equal rights and the civil rights movement.
FIGURE 21.10 Extension occurs when social movements have sympathetic causes. Women’s rights, racial equality,
and LGBT advocacy are all human rights issues. (Credit: Photos (a) and (b) Wikimedia Commons; Photo (c) Charlie
Nguyen/flickr)
Transformation means a complete revision of goals. Once a movement has succeeded, it risks losing relevance.
If it wants to remain active, the movement has to change with the transformation or risk becoming obsolete.
For instance, when the women’s suffrage movement gained women the right to vote, members turned their
attention to advocating equal rights and campaigning to elect women to office. In short, transformation is an
evolution in the existing diagnostic or prognostic frames that generally achieves a total conversion of the
movement.
New Social Movement Theory
New social movement theory, a development of European social scientists in the 1950s and 1960s, attempts
to explain the proliferation of postindustrial and postmodern movements that are difficult to analyze using
traditional social movement theories. Rather than being one specific theory, it is more of a perspective that
revolves around understanding movements as they relate to politics, identity, culture, and social change. Some
of these more complex interrelated movements include ecofeminism, which focuses on the patriarchal society
as the source of environmental problems, and the transgender rights movement. Sociologist Steven Buechler
(2000) suggests that we should be looking at the bigger picture in which these movements arise—shifting to a
macro-level, global analysis of social movements.
21.3 Social Change
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you should be able to:
•
Explain how technology, social institutions, population, and the environment can bring about social change
•
Discuss the importance of modernization in relation to social change
Collective behavior and social movements are just two of the forces driving social change, which is the change
in society created through social movements as well as external factors. Essentially, any disruptive shift in the
status quo, be it intentional or random, human-caused or natural, can lead to social change.
21 • Social Movements and Social Change

Causes of Social Change
Throughout this text, we have discussed various causes and effects of social change. Below is a recap of some
major drivers, including technology, social institutions, population, and the environment. Alone or in
combination, these agents can disturb, improve, disrupt, or otherwise influence society.
Technology
Some would say that improving technology has made our lives easier. Imagine what your day would be like
without the Internet, the automobile, or electricity. In The World Is Flat, Thomas Friedman (2005) argues that
technology is a driving force behind globalization, while the other forces of social change (social institutions,
population, environment) play comparatively minor roles. He suggests that we can view globalization as
occurring in three distinct periods. First, globalization was driven by military expansion, powered by
horsepower and wind power. The countries best able to take advantage of these power sources expanded the
most, and exert control over the politics of the globe from the late fifteenth century to around the year 1800.
The second shorter period from approximately 1800 C.E. to 2000 C.E. consisted of a globalizing economy.
Steam and rail power were the guiding forces of social change and globalization in this period. Finally,
Friedman brings us to the post-millennial era. In this period of globalization, change is driven by technology,
particularly the Internet (Friedman 2005).
Technology can change other societal forces. For example, advances in medical technology allow people to live
longer, have more children, and survive some natural disasters or problems. Advances in agricultural
technology have allowed us to alter food products, which impacts our health as well as the environment. A
given technology can create beneficiaries, but that same technology—especially if it is disruptive—can lead
others to lose their jobs, suffer from pollution, or be monitored or victimized.
The digital divide—the increasing gap between the technological haves and have-nots—exists both locally and
globally. Added security issues include theft of personal information, cyber aggression, and loss of privacy. The
constant change in technology leads to an almost inevitable lack of preparation for new risks on both personal
and societal scales.
Crowdsourcing: Using the Web to Get Things Done
Millions of people today walk around with their heads tilted toward a small device held in their hands. Perhaps you
are reading this textbook on a phone or tablet. People in developed societies now take communication technology
for granted. How has this technology affected social change in our society and others? One very positive way is
crowdsourcing.
Thanks to the web, digital crowdsourcing is the process of obtaining needed services, ideas, or content by soliciting
contributions from a large group of people, and especially from an online community rather than from traditional
employees or suppliers. Web-based companies such as Kickstarter have been created precisely for the purposes of
raising large amounts of money in a short period of time, notably by sidestepping the traditional financing process.
This book, or virtual book, is the product of a kind of crowdsourcing effort. It has been written and reviewed by
several authors in a variety of fields to give you free access to a large amount of data produced at a low cost. The
most common example of crowdsourced data is Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia, which is the result of thousands
of volunteers adding and correcting material.
Perhaps the most striking use of crowdsourcing is disaster relief. By tracking tweets and e-mails and organizing the
data in order of urgency and quantity, relief agencies can address the most urgent calls for help, such as for medical
aid, food, shelter, or rescue. On January 12, 2010 a devastating earthquake hit the nation of Haiti. By January 25, a
crisis map had been created from more than 2,500 incident reports, and more reports were added every day. The
same technology was used to assist victims of the Japanese earthquake and tsunami in 2011.
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
21.3 • Social Change

The Darker Side of Technology: Electronic Aggression in the Information Age
The U.S. Center for Disease Control (CDC) uses the term "electronic aggression" to describe "any type of
harassment or bullying that occurs through e-mail, a chat room, instant messaging, a website (including
blogs), or text messaging" (CDC, n.d.) We generally think of this as cyberbullying. A 2011 study by the U.S.
Department of Education found that 27.8 percent of students aged twelve through eighteen reported
experiencing bullying. From the same sample 9 percent specifically reported having been a victim of
cyberbullying (Robers et al. 2013).
Cyberbullying represents a powerful change in modern society. William F. Ogburn (1922) might have been
describing it nearly a century ago when he defined "cultural lag," which occurs when material culture precedes
nonmaterial culture. That is, society may not fully comprehend all the consequences of a new technology and
so may initially reject it (such as stem cell research) or embrace it, sometimes with unintended negative
consequences (such as pollution).
Cyberbullying is a special feature of the Internet. Unique to electronic aggression is that it can happen twenty-
four hours a day, every day; it can reach a child (or an adult) even though she or he might otherwise feel safe in
a locked house. The messages and images may be posted anonymously and to a very wide audience, and they
might even be impossible to trace. Finally, once posted, the texts and images are very hard to delete. Its effects
range from the use of alcohol and drugs to lower self-esteem, health problems, and even suicide (CDC, n.d.).
Social Institutions
Each change in a single social institution leads to changes in all social institutions. For example, the
industrialization of society meant that there was no longer a need for large families to produce enough manual
labor to run a farm. Further, new job opportunities were in close proximity to urban centers where living space
was at a premium. The result is that the average family size shrunk significantly.
This same shift toward industrial corporate entities also changed the way we view government involvement in
the private sector, created the global economy, provided new political platforms, and even spurred new
religions and new forms of religious worship like Scientology. It has also informed the way we educate our
children: originally schools were set up to accommodate an agricultural calendar so children could be home to
work the fields in the summer, and even today, teaching models are largely based on preparing students for
industrial jobs, despite that being an outdated need. A shift in one area, such as industrialization, means an
interconnected impact across social institutions.
Population
Population composition is changing at every level of society. Births increase in one nation and decrease in
another. Some families delay childbirth while others start bringing children into their folds early. Population
changes can be due to random external forces, like an epidemic, or shifts in other social institutions, as
described above. But regardless of why and how it happens, population trends have a tremendous interrelated
impact on all other aspects of society.
In the United States, we are experiencing an increase in our senior population as Baby Boomers retire, which
will in turn change the way many of our social institutions are organized. For example, there is an increased
demand for housing in warmer climates, a massive shift in the need for elder care and assisted living facilities,
and growing incidence of elder abuse. Retiring Boomers may also lead to labor or expertise shortages, and (as
discussed extensively in the chapter on Aging and the Elderly) healthcare costs will increase to become a
larger and larger portion of our economy.
Globally, often the countries with the highest fertility rates are least able to absorb and attend to the needs of a
growing population. Family planning is a large step in ensuring that families are not burdened with more
children than they can care for. On a macro level, the increased population, particularly in the poorest parts of
the globe, also leads to increased stress on the planet’s resources.
21 • Social Movements and Social Change

The Environment
As discussed extensively in the chapter on Population, Urbanization, and the Environment, changes in the
environment and our interaction with it can have promising or devastating effects. Access to safe water is a
primary determinant of health and prosperity. And as human populations expand in more vulnerable areas
while natural disasters occur with more frequency, we see an increase in the number of people affected by
those disasters.
Overall health and wellbeing are deeply affected by the environment even in urbanized areas. Many types of
cancers, which are collectively the leading cause of death in higher-income countries, have environmental
influences (Mahase 2019).
Hurricane Katrina: When It All Comes Together
The four key elements that affect social change that are described in this chapter are the environment, technology,
social institutions, and population. In 2005, New Orleans was struck by a devastating hurricane. But it was not just
the hurricane that was disastrous. It was the converging of all four of these elements, and the text below will
connect the elements by putting the words in parentheses.
Before Hurricane Katrina (environment) hit, poorly coordinated evacuation efforts had left about 25 percent of the
population, almost entirely African Americans who lacked private transportation, to suffer the consequences of the
coming storm (demographics). Then "after the storm, when the levees broke, thousands more [refugees] came. And
the city buses, meant to take them to proper shelters, were underwater" (Sullivan 2005). No public transportation
was provided, drinking water and communications were delayed, and FEMA, the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (institutions), was headed by an appointee with no real experience in emergency management. Those who
were eventually evacuated did not know where they were being sent or how to contact family members. African
Americans were sent the farthest from their homes. When the displaced began to return, public housing had not
been reestablished, yet the Superdome stadium, which had served as a temporary disaster shelter, had been
rebuilt. Homeowners received financial support, but renters did not.
As it turns out, it was not entirely the hurricane that cost the lives of 1,500 people, but the fact that the city’s storm
levees (technology), which had been built too low and which failed to meet numerous other safety specifications,
gave way, flooding the lower portions of the city, occupied almost entirely by African Americans.
Journalist Naomi Klein, in her book The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism, presents a theory of a
"triple shock," consisting of an initial disaster, an economic shock that replaces public services with private (for-
profit) ones, and a third shock consisting of the intense policing of the remaining public. Klein supports her claim by
quoting then-Congressman Richard Baker as saying, "We finally cleaned up public housing in New Orleans. We
couldn't do it, but God did." She quotes developer Joseph Canizaro as stating, "I think we have a clean sheet to start
again. And with that clean sheet we have some very big opportunities."
One clean sheet was that New Orleans began to replace public schools with charters, breaking the teachers’ union
and firing all public school teachers (Mullins 2014). Public housing was seriously reduced and the poor were forced
out altogether or into the suburbs far from medical and other facilities (The Advocate 2013). Finally, by relocating
African Americans and changing the ratio of African Americans to whites, New Orleans changed its entire
demographic makeup.
Modernization
Modernization describes the processes that increase the amount of specialization and differentiation of
structure in societies resulting in the move from an undeveloped society to a developed, technologically driven
society (Irwin 1975). By this definition, the level of modernity within a society is judged by the sophistication of
SOCIOLOGY IN THE REAL WORLD
21.3 • Social Change

its technology, particularly as it relates to infrastructure, industry, and the like. However, it is important to note
the inherent ethnocentric bias of such assessment. Why do we assume that those living in semi-peripheral and
peripheral nations would find it so wonderful to become more like the core nations? Is modernization always
positive?
One contradiction of all kinds of technology is that they often promise time-saving benefits, but somehow fail
to deliver. How many times have you ground your teeth in frustration at an Internet site that refused to load or
at a dropped call on your cell phone? Despite time-saving devices such as dishwashers, washing machines,
and, now, remote control vacuum cleaners, the average amount of time spent on housework is the same today
as it was fifty years ago. And the dubious benefits of 24/7 e-mail and immediate information have simply
increased the amount of time employees are expected to be responsive and available. While once businesses
had to travel at the speed of the U.S. postal system, sending something off and waiting until it was received
before the next stage, today the immediacy of information transfer means there are no such breaks.
Further, the Internet bought us information, but at a cost. The morass of information means that there is as
much poor information available as trustworthy sources. There is a delicate line to walk when core nations
seek to bring the assumed benefits of modernization to more traditional cultures. For one, there are obvious
procapitalist biases that go into such attempts, and it is short-sighted for western governments and social
scientists to assume all other countries aspire to follow in their footsteps. Additionally, there can be a kind of
neo-liberal defense of rural cultures, ignoring the often crushing poverty and diseases that exist in peripheral
nations and focusing only on a nostalgic mythology of the happy peasant. It takes a very careful hand to
understand both the need for cultural identity and preservation as well as the hopes for future growth.
21 • Social Movements and Social Change

Key Terms
acting crowds
crowds of people who are focused on a specific action or goal
alternative movements
social movements that limit themselves to self-improvement changes in
individuals
assembling perspective
a theory that credits individuals in crowds as behaving as rational thinkers and
views crowds as engaging in purposeful behavior and collective action
casual crowds
people who share close proximity without really interacting
collective behavior
a noninstitutionalized activity in which several people voluntarily engage
conventional crowds
people who come together for a regularly scheduled event
crowd
a fairly large number of people who share close proximity
crowdsourcing
the process of obtaining needed services, ideas, or content by soliciting contributions from
a large group of people
diagnostic framing
a the social problem that is stated in a clear, easily understood manner
emergent norm theory
a perspective that emphasizes the importance of social norms in crowd behavior
expressive crowds
crowds who share opportunities to express emotions
flash mob
a large group of people who gather together in a spontaneous activity that lasts a limited amount
of time
frame alignment process
using bridging, amplification, extension, and transformation as an ongoing and
intentional means of recruiting participants to a movement
mass
a relatively large group with a common interest, even if they may not be in close proximity
modernization
the process that increases the amount of specialization and differentiation of structure in
societies
motivational framing
a call to action
new social movement theory
a theory that attempts to explain the proliferation of postindustrial and
postmodern movements that are difficult to understand using traditional social movement theories
NGO
nongovernmental organizations working globally for numerous humanitarian and environmental
causes
prognostic framing
social movements that state a clear solution and a means of implementation
public
an unorganized, relatively diffuse group of people who share ideas
reform movements
movements that seek to change something specific about the social structure
religious/redemptive movements
movements that work to promote inner change or spiritual growth in
individuals
resistance movements
those who seek to prevent or undo change to the social structure
resource mobilization theory
a theory that explains social movements’ success in terms of their ability to
acquire resources and mobilize individuals
revolutionary movements
movements that seek to completely change every aspect of society
social change
the change in a society created through social movements as well as through external factors
like environmental shifts or technological innovations
social movement
a purposeful organized group hoping to work toward a common social goal
social movement industry
the collection of the social movement organizations that are striving toward
similar goals
social movement organization
a single social movement group
social movement sector
the multiple social movement industries in a society, even if they have widely
varying constituents and goals
value-added theory
a functionalist perspective theory that posits that several preconditions must be in
place for collective behavior to occur
21 • Key Terms

Section Summary
21.1 Collective Behavior
Collective behavior is noninstitutionalized activity in which several people voluntarily engage. There are three
different forms of collective behavior: crowd, mass, and public. There are three main theories on collective
behavior. The first, the emergent-norm perspective, emphasizes the importance of social norms in crowd
behavior. The next, the value-added theory, is a functionalist perspective that states that several preconditions
must be in place for collective behavior to occur. Finally the assembling perspective focuses on collective
action rather than collective behavior, addressing the processes associated with crowd behavior and the
lifecycle and various categories of gatherings.
21.2 Social Movements
Social movements are purposeful, organized groups, either with the goal of pushing toward change, giving
political voice to those without it, or gathering for some other common purpose. Social movements intersect
with environmental changes, technological innovations, and other external factors to create social change.
There are a myriad of catalysts that create social movements, and the reasons that people join are as varied as
the participants themselves. Sociologists look at both the macro- and microanalytical reasons that social
movements occur, take root, and ultimately succeed or fail.
21.3 Social Change
There are numerous and varied causes of social change. Four common causes, as recognized by social
scientists, are technology, social institutions, population, and the environment. All four of these areas can
impact when and how society changes. And they are all interrelated: a change in one area can lead to changes
throughout. Modernization is a typical result of social change. Modernization refers to the process of increased
differentiation and specialization within a society, particularly around its industry and infrastructure. While
this assumes that more modern societies are better, there has been significant pushback on this western-
centric view that all peripheral and semi-peripheral countries should aspire to be like North America and
Western Europe.
Section Quiz
21.1 Collective Behavior
1. Which of the following organizations is not an example of a social movement?
a.
National Football League
b.
Tea Party
c.
Greenpeace
d.
NAACP
2. Sociologists using conflict perspective might study what?
a.
How social movements develop
b.
What social purposes a movement serves
c.
What motivates inequitably treated people to join a movement
d.
What individuals hope to gain from taking part in a social movement
3. Which of the following is an example of collective behavior?
a.
A soldier questioning orders
b.
A group of people interested in hearing an author speak
c.
A class going on a field trip
d.
Going shopping with a friend
21 • Section Summary

4. The protesters at the Egypt uprising rally were:
a.
a casual crowd
b.
a conventional crowd
c.
a mass
d.
an acting crowd
5. According to emergent-norm theory, crowds are:
a.
irrational and impulsive
b.
often misinterpreted and misdirected
c.
able to develop their own definition of the situation
d.
prone to criminal behavior
6. A boy throwing rocks during a demonstration might be an example of ___________.
a.
structural conduciveness
b.
structural strain
c.
precipitating factors
d.
mobilization for action
21.2 Social Movements
7. If we divide social movements according to their positions among all social movements in a society, we are
using the __________ theory to understand social movements.
a.
framing
b.
new social movement
c.
resource mobilization
d.
value-added
8. While PETA is a social movement organization, taken together, the animal rights social movement
organizations PETA, ALF, and Greenpeace are a __________.
a.
social movement industry
b.
social movement sector
c.
social movement party
d.
social industry
9. Social movements are:
a.
disruptive and chaotic challenges to the government
b.
ineffective mass movements
c.
the collective action of individuals working together in an attempt to establish new norms beliefs, or
values
d.
the singular activities of a collection of groups working to challenge the status quo
10. When the League of Women Voters successfully achieved its goal of women being allowed to vote, they had
to undergo frame __________, a means of completely changing their goals to ensure continuing relevance.
a.
extension
b.
amplification
c.
bridging
d.
transformation
21 • Section Quiz

11. If a movement claims that the best way to reverse climate change is to reduce carbon emissions by
outlawing privately owned cars, “outlawing cars” is the ________.
a.
prognostic framing
b.
diagnostic framing
c.
motivational framing
d.
frame transformation
21.3 Social Change
12. Children in peripheral nations have little to no daily access to computers and the Internet, while children
in core nations are constantly exposed to this technology. This is an example of:
a.
the digital divide
b.
human ecology
c.
modernization theory
d.
dependency theory
13. When sociologists think about technology as an agent of social change, which of the following is not an
example?
a.
Population growth
b.
Medical advances
c.
The Internet
d.
Genetically engineered food
14. China is undergoing a shift in industry, increasing labor specialization and the amount of differentiation
present in the social structure. This exemplifies:
a.
human ecology
b.
dependency theory
c.
modernization
d.
conflict perspective
15. Core nations that work to propel peripheral nations toward modernization need to be aware of:
a.
preserving peripheral nation cultural identity
b.
preparing for pitfalls that come with modernization
c.
avoiding hegemonistic assumptions about modernization
d.
all of the above
16. In addition to social movements, social change is also caused by technology, social institutions, population
and ______.
a.
the environment
b.
modernization
c.
social structure
d.
new social movements
Short Answer
21.1 Collective Behavior
1. Discuss the differences between a mass and a crowd. What is an example of each? What sets them apart?
What do they share in common?
2. Can you think of a time when your behavior in a crowd was dictated by the circumstances? Give an example
of emergent-norm perspective, using your own experience.
21 • Short Answer

3. Discuss the differences between an acting crowd and a collective crowd. Give examples of each.
4. Imagine you are at a rally protesting nuclear energy use. Walk us through the hypothetical rally using the
value-added theory, imagining it meets all the stages.
21.2 Social Movements
5. Think about a social movement industry dealing with a cause that is important to you. How do the different
social movement organizations of this industry seek to engage you? Which techniques do you respond to?
Why?
6. Do you think social media is an important tool in creating social change? Why, or why not? Defend your
opinion.
7. Describe a social movement in the decline stage. What is its issue? Why has it reached this stage?
21.3 Social Change
8. Consider one of the major social movements of the twentieth century, from civil rights in the United States
to Gandhi’s nonviolent protests in India. How would technology have changed it? Would change have come
more quickly or more slowly? Defend your opinion.
9. Discuss the digital divide in the context of modernization. Is there a real concern that poorer communities
are lacking in technology? Why, or why not?
10. Which theory do you think better explains the global economy: dependency theory (global inequity is due
to the exploitation of peripheral and semi-peripheral nations by core nations) or modernization theory?
Remember to justify your answer and provide specific examples.
11. Do you think that modernization is good or bad? Explain, using examples.
References
Introduction to Social Movements and Social Change
AFL-CIO. 2014. "Executive Paywatch." Retrieved December 17, 2014 (http://www.aflcio.org/Corporate-Watch/
Paywatch-2014).
Castells, Manuel. 2012. Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age. Camgridge, UK:
Polity.
Davies, James C. 1962. "Toward a Theory of Revolution." American Sociological Review 27, no. 1. Retrieved
December 17, 2014 (http://www.jstor.org/discover/
2089714?sid=21104884442891&uid=3739256&uid=3739704&uid=4&uid=2).
Gell, Aaron. 2011. "The Wall Street Protesters: What the Hell Do They Want?" New York Observer. Retrieved
December 17, 2014 (http://observer.com/2011/09/the-wall-street-protesters-what-the-hell-do-they-want/).
Le Tellier, Alexandria. 2012. "What Occupy Wall Street Wants." Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 17,
2014 (http://articles.latimes.com/2012/sep/17/news/la-ol-occupy-wall-street-anniversary-
message-20120917).
NAACP. 2011. “100 Years of History.” Retrieved December 21, 2011 (http://www.naacp.org/pages/naacp-
history).
21.1 Collective Behavior
Blumer, Herbert. 1969. “Collective Behavior.” Pp. 67–121 in Principles of Sociology, edited by A.M. Lee. New
York: Barnes and Noble.
LeBon, Gustave. 1960 [1895]. The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind. New York: Viking Press.
21 • References

Lofland, John. 1993. “Collective Behavior: The Elementary Forms.” Pp. 70–75 in Collective Behavior and Social
Movements, edited by Russel Curtis and Benigno Aguirre. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
McPhail, Clark. 1991. The Myth of the Madding Crowd. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Smelser, Neil J. 1963. Theory of Collective Behavior. New York: Free Press.
Turner, Ralph, and Lewis M. Killian. 1993. Collective Behavior. 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs, N. J., Prentice Hall.
21.2 Social Movements
A&E Television Networks, LLC. 2014. "Civil Rights Movement." Retrieved December 17, 2014
(http://www.history.com/topics/black-history/civil-rights-movement).
Aberle, David. 1966. The Peyote Religion among the Navaho. Chicago: Aldine.
AP/The Huffington Post. 2014. "Obama: DOMA Unconstitutional, DOJ Should Stop Defending in Court." The
Huffington Post. Retrieved December 17, 2014. (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/02/23/obama-doma-
unconstitutional_n_827134.html).
Associated Press. 2021. "Arkansas governor signs bill allowing denial of medical services based on
'conscience'" The Associated Press. March 26, 2021. (https://www.thv11.com/article/news/politics/
arkansas-governor-bill-allowing-denial-medical-services-conscience/
91-f4321c47-f6b1-4325-a18a-13a89ba98c7c)
Area Chicago. 2011. “About Area Chicago.” Retrieved December 28, 2011 (http://www.areachicago.org).
Benford, Robert, and David Snow. 2000. “Framing Processes and Social Movements: An Overview and
Assessment.” Annual Review of Sociology 26:611–639.
Blumer, Herbert. 1969. “Collective Behavior.” Pp. 67–121 in Principles of Sociology, edited by A.M. Lee. New
York: Barnes and Noble.
Buechler, Steven. 2000. Social Movement in Advanced Capitalism: The Political Economy and Social
Construction of Social Activism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Brown, Eileen. 2011. "Strong and Weak Ties: Why Your Weak Ties Matter." Social Media Today. June 30 2011.
(https://www.socialmediatoday.com/content/strong-and-weak-ties-why-your-weak-ties-matter)
CNN U.S. 2014. "Same-Sex Marriage in the United States." Retrieved December 17, 2014 (http://www.cnn.com/
interactive/us/map-same-sex-marriage/).
CBS Interactive Inc. 2014. "Anonymous' Most Memorable Hacks." Retrieved December 17, 2014
(http://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/anonymous-most-memorable-hacks/9/).
Department of Justice, Office of Public Affairs. 2011. "Letter from the Attorney General to Congress on
Litigation Involving the Defense of Marriage Act." Retrieved December 17, 2014 (http://www.justice.gov/opa/
pr/letter-attorney-general-congress-litigation-involving-defense-marriage-act).
De Alba, Simone. 2021. "Representative who filed Texit bill clears up what he means." News 4 San Antonio.
February 2 2021. (https://news4sanantonio.com/news/local/representative-who-filed-texit-bill-clears-up-
what-it-means)
Gladwell, Malcolm. 2010. “Small Change: Why the Revolution Will Not Be Tweeted.” The New Yorker, October
4. Retrieved December 23, 2011 (http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/10/04/
101004fa_fact_gladwell?currentPage=all).
Goffman, Erving. 1974. Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
21 • References

Human Rights Campaign. 2011. Retrieved December 28, 2011 (http://www.hrc.org).
Knowledge at Wharton. 2020. "How Social Media Is Shaping Political Campaigns." Knowledge@Wharton.
August 17 2020. (https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/how-social-media-is-shaping-political-
campaigns/)
McAdam, Doug, and Ronnelle Paulsen. 1993. “Specifying the Relationship between Social Ties and Activism.”
American Journal of Sociology 99:640–667.
McCarthy, John D., and Mayer N. Zald. 1977. “Resource Mobilization and Social Movements: A Partial Theory.”
American Journal of Sociology 82:1212–1241.
National Organization for Marriage. 2014. “About NOM.” Retrieved January 28, 2012
(http://www.nationformarriage.org).
Nonprofit Source. 2020. "Social Media Giving Statistics for Nonprofits." Retrieved April 1, 2021.
(https://nonprofitssource.com/online-giving-statistics/social-media/)
Sauter, Theresa, and Gavin Kendall. 2011. "Parrhesia and Democracy: Truthtelling, WikiLeaks and the Arab
Spring." Social Alternatives 30, no.3: 10–14.
Schmitz, Paul. 2014. "How Change Happens: The Real Story of Mrs. Rosa Parks & the Montgomery Bus
Boycott." Huffington Post. Retrieved December 17, 2014 (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/paul-schmitz/how-
change-happens-the-re_b_6237544.html).
Slow Food. 2011. “Slow Food International: Good, Clean, and Fair Food.” Retrieved December 28, 2011
(http://www.slowfood.com).
Snow, David, E. Burke Rochford, Jr., Steven , and Robert Benford. 1986. “Frame Alignment Processes,
Micromobilization, and Movement Participation.” American Sociological Review 51:464–481.
Snow, David A., and Robert D. Benford 1988. “Ideology, Frame Resonance, and Participant Mobilization.”
International Social Movement Research 1:197–217.
Technopedia. 2014. "Anonymous." Retrieved December 17, 2014 (http://www.techopedia.com/definition/
27213/anonymous-hacking).
Texas Secede! 2009. “Texas Secession Facts.” Retrieved December 28, 2011 (http://www.texassecede.com).
Tilly, Charles. 1978. From Mobilization to Revolution. New York: Mcgraw-Hill College.
Wagenseil, Paul. 2011. "Anonymous 'hacktivists' attack Egyptian websites." NBC News. Retrieved December 17,
2014 (http://www.nbcnews.com/id/41280813/ns/technology_and_science-security/t/anonymous-
hacktivists-attack-egyptian-websites/#.VJHmuivF-Sq).
Walsh, Colleen. 2020. "MeToo Founder Discusses Where We Go From Here." The Harvard Gazette. February 21
2020. (https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2020/02/me-too-founder-tarana-burke-discusses-where-
we-go-from-here/)
21.3 Social Change
350.org. 2014. "350.org." Retrieved December 18, 2014 (http://350.org/).
ABC News. 2007. "Parents: Cyber Bullying Led to Teen's Suicide." Retrieved December 18, 2014
(http://abcnews.go.com/GMA/story?id=3882520).
CBS News. 2011. “Record Year for Billion Dollar Disasters.” CBS News, Dec 11. Retrieved December 26, 2011
(http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-201_162-57339130/record-year-for-billion-dollar-disasters).
Center for Biological Diversity. 2014. "The Extinction Crisis. Retrieved December 18, 2014
21 • References

(http://www.biologicaldiversity.org/programs/biodiversity/elements_of_biodiversity/extinction_crisis/).
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). n.d. "Technology and Youth: Protecting your Children from
Electronic Aggression: Tip Sheet." Retrieved December 18, 2014 (http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/
pdf/ea-tipsheet-a.pdf).
Freidman, Thomas. 2005. The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the 21st Century. New York, NY: Farrar, Strauss,
and Giroux.
Gao, Huiji, Geoffrey Barbier, and Rebecca Goolsby. 2011. "Harnessing the Crowdsourcing Power of Social
Media for Disaster Relief." IEEE Intelligent Systems. 26, no. 03: 10–14.
Irwin, Patrick. 1975. “An Operational Definition of Societal Modernization.” Economic Development and
Cultural Change 23:595–613.
Klein, Naomi. 2008. The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. New York: Picador.
Kolbert, Elizabeth. 2014. The Sixth Extinction. New York: Henry Holt and Co.
Mahase, Elisabeth. 2019. "Cancer overtakes CVD to become leading cause of death in high income countries"
The BMJ. September 3 2019. (https://www.bmj.com/content/366/bmj.l5368)
Megan Meier Foundation. 2014a. "Megan Meier Foundation." Retrieved December 18, 2014
(http://www.meganmeierfoundation.org/).
Megan Meier Foundation. 2014b. "Megan's Story." Retrieved December 18, 2014
(http://www.meganmeierfoundation.org/megans-story.html).
Miller, Laura. 2010. “Fresh Hell: What’s Behind the Boom in Dystopian Fiction for Young Readers?” The New
Yorker, June 14. Retrieved December 26, 2011 (http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/atlarge/2010/06/14/
100614crat_atlarge_miller).
Mullins, Dexter. 2014. "New Orleans to Be Home to Nation's First All-Charter School District." Al Jazeera
America. Retrieved December 18, 2014 (http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2014/4/4/new-orleans-
charterschoolseducationreformracesegregation.html).
Robers, Simone, Jana Kemp, Jennifer, Truman, and Thomas D. Snyder. 2013. Indicators of School Crime and
Safety: 2012. National Center for Education Statistics, U.S. Department of Education, and Bureau of Justice
Statistics, Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice: Washington, DC. Retrieved December 17,
2014 (http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2013/2013036.pdf).
Sullivan, Melissa. 2005. "How New Orleans' Evacuation Plan Fell Apart." NPR. Retrieved December 18, 2014
(http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=4860776).
Wikia. 2014. "List of Environmental Organizations." Retrieved December 18, 2014 (http://green.wikia.com/
wiki/List_of_Environmental_organizations).
21 • References

ANSWER KEY
Chapter 1
1. C
3. A
5. B
7. B
9. B
11. D
13. B
15. D
17. C
Chapter 2
1. C
3. C
5. C
7. D
9. A
11. B
13. B
15. A
Chapter 3
1. D
3. A
5. D
7. A
9. A
11. C
13. A
15. A
17. B
19. C
21. B
Chapter 4
1. C
3. C
5. C
7. D
9. A
11. A
Chapter 5
1. B
3. C
5. D
7. D
9. C
11. D
13. B
15. A
Chapter 6
1. C
3. A
5. D
7. D
9. C
11. D
13. D
15. B
17. D
19. A
Chapter 7
1. D
3. A
5. C
7. B
9. B
11. C
13. C
15. B
Chapter 8
1. C
3. D
5. C
7. D
9. D
11. B
13. D
15. A
17. A
19. C
Chapter 9
1. B
3. B
5. D
7. A
9. B
11. A
13. C
15. B
17. D
Chapter 10
1. B
3. D
5. D
7. B
9. B
11. A
13. A
15. D
Chapter 11
1. D
3. D
5. B
7. B
9. B
11. C
13. B
15. D
17. A
19. D
Chapter 12
1. B
3. B
5. C
7. B
9. D
11. C
13. B
15. A
17. B
Chapter 13
1. B
3. B
5. C
7. A
9. D
11. B
13. C
15. B
17. A
19. A

Chapter 14
1. A
3. C
5. B
7. B
9. A
11. D
13. C
15. B
Chapter 15
1. D
3. B
5. C
7. B
9. B
11. A
13. C
15. C
Chapter 16
1. A
3. B
5. A
7. C
9. D
11. D
13. C
15. D 17. C
19. C
Chapter 17
1. C
3. B
5. B
7. B
9. D
11. B
13. B
15. D
17. D
19. D
21. B
23. A
Chapter 18
1. B
3. C
5. C
7. B
9. A
11. D
13. D
15. C
17. C
Chapter 19
1. C
3. A
5. A
7. C
9. B
11. D
13. B
15. C
17. D
19. A
Chapter 20
1. A
3. C
5. A
7. D
9. A
11. B
13. D
15. D
17. D
19. B
Chapter 21
1. A
3. B
5. C 7. C
9. C
11. A
13. A
15. D

INDEX
A
absolute monarchies 502
Absolute poverty 248
accuracy 39
achieved statuses 111
acting crowds 628
activity theory 391
age stratification theory 394
Ageism 387
aggregate 149
agricultural societies 101
Alienation 106
Alternative movements 634
Amalgamation 303
ambilineal 413
anarchy 502
Animism 450, 451
anomie 104
anticipatory socialization 135
anxiety disorders 568
ascribed 111
assembling perspective 630
Assimilation 301
asylum-seekers 600
Atheism 450
atheists 451
authoritarian leaders 155
Authority 500
automation 543
B
Baby Boomers 374
bartering 526
beliefs 73
bigamy 413
bilateral descent 413
biological determinism 350
bourgeoisie 105
bureaucracies 159
bystander effect 159
C
cancer cluster 610
Capital flight 268
capitalism 105, 529
career inheritance 537
carrying capacity 596
case study 50
Caste systems 240
Casual crowds 628
category 149
charismatic authority 501
Chattel slavery 278
class 240
class consciousness 107
class system 240
Class traits 247
clear division of labor 160
climate change 605
Closed systems 239
code of ethics 53
Coercive organizations 159
cohabitation 412
cohort 371
collective behavior 627
collective conscience 103
Color-Avoidance Racism 299
Colorism 298
commodification 575
concentric zone model 603
Conflict theory 20, 180, 180
Conformity 157
conspicuous consumption 253
constitutional monarchies 503
Constructivism 22
content analysis 52
Contested illnesses 561
continuity theory 391
Conventional crowds 628
Convergence theory 534
Core nations 267
Cornucopian theory 596
corporate crime 187
corrections system 191
correlation 44
countercultures 81
court 190
Credentialism 481
Crime 186
criminal justice system 189
critical theory 20
crowd 628
crowdsourcing 639
Cults 448
cultural capital 479
Cultural imperialism 69
Cultural patterns 9
Cultural Racism 298
cultural relativism 70
Cultural transmission 471
Cultural universals 68
culture 9, 66, 88
culture lag 83
Culture of prejudice 296
culture shock 70
cyberfeminism 223
D
Davis-Moore thesis 251
de facto segregation 300
debt accumulation 270
debt bondage 278
degradation ceremony 136
Deindustrialization 268
demedicalization 576
democracy 506
Democratic leaders 155
Demographic transition
theory 597
demography 592
denomination 449
dependency ratio 376
Dependency theory 279
dependent variable (DV) 38
depression 536
design patent 208
deviance 174
diagnostic framing 637
dictatorship 505
differential association
theory 184
diffusion 82, 83
digital divide 203
Disability 570
discrimination 297
Index

disengagement theory 390
doing gender 350
dominant group 292
downward mobility 247
dramaturgical analysis 22
dyad 154
dynamic equilibrium 18
dysfunctions 19
E
e-readiness 203
E-waste 608
ecclesia 449
economy 521
Education 469
Elder abuse 387
Emergent norm theory 628
empirical evidence 35
endogamous marriage 240
Environmental racism 611
environmental sociology 604
epidemiology 575
established sects 449
Ethnicity 291
ethnocentrism 69
Ethnography 48
evolutionary model of
technological change 208
exchange theory 394
existing social movement
sector 636
exogamous marriage 240
experiment 51
explicit rules 160
Expressive crowds 628
expressive functions 149
expressive leaders 155
Expulsion 303
extreme poverty 272
exurbs 601
F
false consciousness 107
family 411
family life course 415
family life cycle 414
family of orientation 411
family of procreation 411
feminization of poverty 248
fertility rate 592
feudal societies 101
Field research 43
figuration 10
filial piety 377
first world 267
flash mobs 627
folkways 75
Formal education 471
formal organizations 159
Formal sanctions 177
fourth world 267
Fracking 589
frame alignment process 637
function 18
Functionalism 18
G
gatekeeping 221
Gender 331
Gender dysphoria 338
Gender identity 336
gender role 334
generalized other 123
generalized others 16
Genocide 303
Gentrification 602
geriatrics 378
gerontocracy 387
Gerontology 369
gerotranscendence 396
Gini Coefficient 265
global assembly lines 538
global commodity chains 538
global inequality 264
Global stratification 249, 265
globalization 83, 537
Grade inflation 480
Grand theories 17
grief 383
group 149
H
habitualization 110
hate crimes 187
Hawthorne effect 51
Head Start program 483
heterosexism 339
heterosexual 333
hidden curriculum 130, 479
Hierarchy of authority 160
high culture 80, 80
high, low, and pop 80
Historical Racism 298
Horticultural societies 100
hospice 384
Human ecology 602
Hunter-gatherer societies 99
hypothesis 17, 38
I
ideal culture 73
ideology 240
impairment 570
impersonality 160
in-group 151
income 239
independent variables (IV) 38
individual mandate 572
Individual or Interpersonal
Racism 298
industrial societies 102
informal education 471
informal sanctions 177
Information societies 102
innovation 82, 82
institutionalization 110
instrumental function 149
instrumental leader 155
intergenerational mobility 247
internally displaced person 600
interpretive framework 40
intersection theory 295
Intersex 337
interview 43
intimate partner violence
(IPV) 425
intragenerational mobility 247
iron cage 108
Iron Rule of Oligarchy 161
K
kinship 413
knowledge gap 203
L
Labeling theory 182
laissez-faire 155
Language 77
latent functions 19
Leadership function 155
Index

leadership styles 155
legal codes 187
legitimation 575
Liberation theology 456
life course 378
life expectancy 373
literature review 38
looking-glass self 113
low culture 80, 80
M
macro-level 8
Malthusian theory 596
Manifest functions 18
Market socialism 532
marriage 411
mass 628
Mass media 132
master status 182
matrilineal 413
matrilocal residence 413
McDonaldization of Society 162
mechanical solidarity 104, 521
Media 207
Media consolidation 216
media globalization 215
Medical sociology 560
Medicalization 566
medicalization of deviance 576
megachurch 456
megalopolis 601
Mercantilism 527
meritocracies 160
Meritocracy 241
metropolis 601
micro-level 8
minority group 292
misogyny 347
model minority 312
Modernization 641
modernization theory 278, 393
monarchy 502
Money 526
monogamy 412
Monotheism 450, 451
mood disorders 568
Moral development 123
Morbidity 566
Mores 75
mortality rate 592
motivational framing 637
mutualism 533
N
narcotizing dysfunction 221
nature 125
Negative sanctions 177
Neo-Luddites 223
net neutrality 206
New media 212
New social movement
theory 638
No Child Left Behind Act 484
Nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs) 633
Nonmaterial culture 67
nonreactive research 52
Nonviolent crimes 187
Normative organizations 159
norms 74
nuclear family 416
nurture 125
O
oligarchy 503
oligopoly 216
one person, one vote 508
Open systems 239
operational definition 39
organic solidarity 104, 521
out-group 151
outsourcing 543
P
panoptic surveillance 221
paradigms 17
participant observation 45
Pastoral societies 99
patrilineal 413
patrilocal residence 413
patrimonialism 501
peer group 129
Peripheral nations 267
personality disorders 568
physician-assisted suicide 384
planned obsolescence 212
Plant patents 208
Pluralism 301
Polarization 543
Police 189
politics 507
Pollution 606
Polygamy 412
Polytheism 450
polytheistic 451
popular culture 80
population 42
population composition 594
population pyramid 594
Positive sanctions 177
positivism 12
power 498
power elite 180, 510
Prejudice 296
primary aging 379
primary data 43
Primary deviance 182
primary groups 149
primogeniture 242
private healthcare 572
Prognostic framing 637
proletariat 105
public 628
public healthcare 572
Q
qualitative data 42
quantitative data 42
Queer Theory 355
R
racial profiling 290, 298
racial steering 299
Racism 298
random sample 42
rational-legal authority 501
rationalization 108
real culture 73
recession 536
Redlining 300
reference group 152
Reform movements 633
refugee 600
Relative poverty 249, 272
reliability 39
religion 441
Religious beliefs 443
Religious experience 443
Religious rituals 443
Religious/Redemptive
Index

movements 633
representative democracy 506
Resistance movements 634
resocialization 135
resource mobilization
theory 636
Revolutionary movements 633
role conflict 111
Role performance 112
role strain 111
role-set 111
Roles 111
S
sample 42
sanctions 73, 177
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis 77
Scapegoat theory 292
scientific method 35
second world 267
secondary aging 379
secondary data analysis 41, 52
Secondary deviance 182
secondary groups 149
sect 448
sedimentation of racial
inequality 300
Segregation 304
selective optimization with
compensation theory 395
self 122
self-fulfilling prophecy 110
self-report study 188
Semi-peripheral nations 268
senescence 385
Sex 331
sex ratio 594
Sexism 343
sexual orientation 332
sexuality 332, 351
shaken-baby syndrome 428
sick role 575
significant others 16
social change 638
social construction of race 290
social construction of
sexuality 350
social control 73, 177
social disorganization
theory 179
Social epidemiology 563
social facts 9
Social gerontology 369
social institution 10
social institutions 18, 74
social integration 104
Social mobility 247
social movement industry 636
Social movements 631
social order 177
social placement 476
social solidarity 17
Social stratification 237
Socialism 531
Socialization 121
socialized medicine 573
society 8, 88, 98
socioeconomic status (SES) 237
sociological imagination 9
Sociology 8
sorting 478
standard of living 248
status 111
status consistency 241
stereotype
interchangeability 571
Stereotypes 296
Stigmatization 570
stigmatization of illness 561
strain theory 179
street crime 187
Structural mobility 248
structural racism or institutional
racism 298
structural unemployment 546
subculture 81
subculture of aging theory 395
Subjective poverty 272
subordinate group 292
subsistence farming 528
Suburbs 601
survey 41
sustainable development 602
symbols 77
Systemic Racism 298
T
technological diffusion 218
technological globalization 215
technology 202
technophiles 223
thanatology 384
third world 267
Thomas theorem 110
total institutions 159
totalitarian dictatorship 505
Totemism 451, 451
tracking 479
traditional authority 501
Transgender 336
triad 154
U
underemployment 546
underground economy 273
Unilateral descent 413
universal access 471
universal healthcare 574
Upward mobility 247
urban sociology 599
Urbanization 599
utilitarian organizations 160
Utility patents 208
V
validity 39
value neutrality 53
value-added theory 629
values 73
victimless crime 187
Violent crimes 187
voluntary organizations 159
W
wealth 239
White flight 602
White privilege 297
X
Xenocentrism 71
xenophobia 538
Z
zero population growth 596
Index

Index