Chapter 3: Culture and Society 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
If you passed someone in a hallway, joined a video conference, or even called into a radio show, it’s likely you and the 
other people involved would exchange some version of the following question: “How are you?” One of you may ask the 
other. You may exchange a greeting and the question or one of its variants. Generally, we do not consider our responses 
to these acquaintances as rules. We simply say, “Hello!” and ask, “How was your weekend?” or some other trivial 
question meant to be a friendly greeting. Why are these common ways that people communicate in the United States?  
The signals we get about what to say and how we act is related to culture, which is comprised of shared values (ideals), 
beliefs which strengthen the values, our perceived rules or norms that maintain the values, language so that the values 
can be taught, symbols that form the language people must learn, arts and artifacts, and the people’s collective 
identities and memories. In sociology, terms such as collective identities and cultural memory are used analytically to 
describe shared understandings within groups, rather than to promote or prescribe identity-based perspectives. 
Sociologically, we examine in which situation and context a certain behavior is expected and in which it is not. People 
who interact within a shared culture create and enforce these expectations. Sociologists examine these circumstances 
and search for patterns. 
Within the U.S., many groups of people share a community and a culture. By “community,” sociologists refer to a 
definable region of a society, as small as a neighborhood (Brooklyn, or “the east side of town”), or as big as a country 
(Ethiopia, Nepal or the U.S.). This chapter provides an overview of what we mean by culture and what we mean by 
society in detail. The discussion includes sociological theories of culture and society. 
3.1   What Is Culture? 
Humans have been forming groups for almost 3 million years in order to survive. Living together, people form common 
habits and behaviors ranging from specific methods of childrearing to preferred techniques for obtaining food. Almost 
every human behavior is learned. In the U.S., marriage is generally seen as an individual choice made by two adults, 
based on mutual feelings of love. In other nations and in other periods of history, marriages were arranged through an 
intricate process of interviews and negotiations between entire families. In Papua New Guinea, almost 30 percent of 
women marry before the age of 18, and 8 percent of men have more than one wife (National Statistical Office, 2019). 
Arranged marriages may seem incompatibility with romantic love for those in cultures where marriage is viewed as a 
personal choice. People from cultures where marriages are arranged report perceive it to reduce stress and increase 
stability of marriages (Jankowiak 2021). 
3.1   What is Culture? 
3.2   Elements of Culture 
3.3   Perspectives on Culture 
3.4   Types of Societies 
3.5   Perspectives on Society 
3.6   Social Constructions of Reality 

 
 
Knowing unwritten rules is fundamental in 
understanding how to behave. Take the case of 
going to work on public transportation. In many 
societies that enjoy public transportation, a 
passenger will find a marked bus stop or 
station, wait for the bus or train, pay an agent 
before or after boarding, and quietly take a seat 
if one is available. But when boarding a bus in 
Cairo, Egypt, passengers might board while the 
bus is moving, because buses often do not 
come to a full stop to take on patrons. In 
Dublin, Ireland, bus riders would be expected to 
extend an arm to indicate that they want the 
bus to stop for them. And when boarding a 
commuter train in Mumbai, India, passengers 
must squeeze into overstuffed cars amid a lot 
of pushing and shoving on the crowded 
platforms, which could be viewed as rude in 
other societies. 
Culture can be material or nonmaterial. Material culture are items you can touch-they are tangible. Nonmaterial culture, 
in contrast, consists of the ideas, attitudes, and beliefs of a society. These are things you cannot touch. You may believe 
that a line should be formed to enter the subway car or that other passengers should not stand so close to you. Those 
beliefs are intangible because they do not have physical properties and can be touched. Material and nonmaterial 
aspects of culture are linked. Physical objects often symbolize cultural ideas.  A metro pass is a material object that can 
symbolize broader social and economic systems—for example, the exchange of money for services within a capitalist 
economy. Clothing, hairstyles, and jewelry are part of material culture, but the appropriateness of wearing certain 
clothing for specific events reflects nonmaterial culture. A school building belongs to material culture symbolizing 
education, but the teaching methods and educational standards are part of education’s nonmaterial culture. 
What happens when we encounter different cultures? As we interact with cultures other than our own, we become more 
aware of the differences and commonalities between others and our own.  By examining cultures other than our own, 
we can develop a deeper understanding of both their distinct characteristics and the universal patterns of human 
behavior.   
Cultural Universals 
Cultural universals are patterns or traits that are globally common to all societies. Anthropologist George Murdock first 
investigated the existence of cultural universals while studying systems of kinship around the world. One example of a 
cultural universal is the family unit: every human society recognizes a family structure that regulates sexual 
reproduction and the care of children. Even so, how that family unit is defined and how it functions vary. In many Asian 
cultures, for example, family members from all generations commonly live together in one household. In these cultures, 
young adults continue to live in the extended household family structure until they marry and join their spouse’s 
household, or they may remain and raise their nuclear family within the extended family’s homestead. In the U.S., by 
contrast, individuals usually leave home and live independently before forming a family unit that consists of parents and 
their offspring. Murdock also identified humor as a universal way to release tensions and create a sense of unity among 
people (Murdock, 1949). Sociologists consider humor necessary to human interaction because it helps individuals 
navigate otherwise tense situations. 
Ethnocentrism and Cultural Relativism 
Cultural differences are far more prevalent than cultural universals. For example, while all cultures have language, 
analysis of conversational etiquette reveals tremendous differences. In some Middle Eastern cultures, it is common to 
 
Figure 3.1   How would a visitor from a rural region act and feel 
on this crowded Hong Kong train? (Credit: Eric Chan/flickr) 

 
 
stand close to others in conversation. Americans keep more distance and maintain a large “personal space.” 
Additionally, behaviors as simple as eating and drinking vary greatly from culture to culture. Some cultures use tools to 
put the food in the mouth while others use their fingers.  
People sometimes express disgust at common behaviors or characteristics of other cultures. Such attitudes are 
sometimes a consequence of ethnocentrism, 
which means to evaluate and judge another 
culture based on one’s own cultural norms. 
Ethnocentrism is believing your group is the 
correct measuring standard and if other cultures 
do not measure up to it, they are wrong. As 
sociologist William Graham Sumner (1906) 
described the term, it is a belief or attitude that 
one’s own culture is better than all others.  
A high level of appreciation for one’s own culture 
can be healthy. A shared sense of community 
pride, for example, connects people in a society. 
But ethnocentrism can lead to disdain or dislike 
of other cultures and could cause 
misunderstanding, stereotyping, and conflict. 
Individuals, government, non-government, private, 
and religious institutions with the best intentions 
sometimes travel to a society to offer assistance 
because they view the people there as 
disadvantaged or lacking opportunity. Cultural 
imperialism is the deliberate imposition of one’s 
own cultural values on another culture. 
Xenocentrism is the opposite of ethnocentrism and refers to the belief that another culture is superior to one’s own. 
(The Greek root word xeno-, pronounced “ZEE-no,” means “stranger” or “foreign guest.”) An exchange student who goes 
home after a semester abroad or a sociologist who returns from the field may find it difficult to associate with the 
values of their own culture after having experienced what they deem a more upright or nobler way of living. An opposite 
reaction is xenophobia, an irrational fear or hatred of different cultures. 
It is important to acknowledge that there are common aspects to all cultures, sometimes referred to as “cultural 
universals.” For instance, psychologist Paul Ekman argued that there are seven emotions that all cultures acknowledge 
and play an important role in survival: anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, surprise, and contempt (see 
https://simplyputpsych.co.uk/psych-101-1/an-overview-of-the-universal-emotions).  
Perhaps the greatest challenge for sociologists is maintaining perspective. It is impossible to remove all bias, but 
awareness helps limit its impact. Valuing one’s own culture does not require imposing its values on others, and 
appreciating another culture does not require full acceptance of all its practices. Sociologists aim to balance 
understanding with objectivity in their research.   
3.2   Elements of Culture 
Values and Beliefs 
The first, and perhaps most crucial, elements of culture are values and beliefs. Value does not mean monetary worth in 
sociology, but rather ideals, or principles and standards members of a culture hold in high regard. A key value for most 
cultures in any society is “knowledge” (education). Values are deeply embedded and are critical for learning a culture’s 
beliefs, which are the tenets or convictions that people hold to be true.  
 
Figure 3.2   Experiencing an entirely new practice may lead to a 
high degree of interest or a level of criticism. The Indegenous 
people of Sagada, in the Philippines, have for thousands of 
years placed the bodies of deceased people into coffins hung 
on the cliffs near their villages. Some visitors may find this 
practice admirable, while others may think it’s inappropriate. 
(Credit: Arian Zwegers/flickr) 

 
 
Individual cultures in a society have personal beliefs, but they also shared collective values. To illustrate the difference, 
U.S. citizens may believe in the American Dream—that anyone who works hard enough will be successful and wealthy. 
Underlying this belief is the American value that wealth is important. However, just because a belief is pervasive, it does 
not necessarily indicate that it is based in fact or serves to positively influence a culture. For instance, in other cultures, 
wealth is not highly regarded, and instead, having many healthy children is viewed as more important. Values shape a 
society by incentivizing behaviors based on what is viewed as good and bad, beautiful and ugly, sought or avoided. 
Values often suggest how people should behave, but they don’t accurately reflect how people do behave. Values portray 
an ideal culture; the standards society would like to embrace and live up to. But ideal culture differs from real culture. In 
an ideal culture, there would be no traffic accidents, murders, or poverty. But in real culture, police officers, lawmakers, 
educators, and social workers constantly strive to prevent or address these issues.  
One of the ways societies strive to maintain its values is through rewards and punishments. People are often rewarded 
when they observe the norms of society and uphold its values. A boy who helps an old woman board a bus may receive 
a smile and a “thank you.” People sanction unwanted or inappropriate behaviors by withholding support, approval, or 
permission, or by implementing sanctions. We may think of ‘sanction’ as a negative term, but sanctions are forms of 
social control, ways to encourage conformity to cultural norms or rules. Sometimes people conform to norms in 
anticipation or expectation of positive sanctions. Receiving good grades, for instance, may mean praise from parents 
and teachers. Sanctions can also be negative. Breaking norms and rejecting values can lead to cultural sanctions such 
as earning a negative label like ‘lazy’ or to legal sanctions, such as traffic tickets, fines, or imprisonment. Utilizing social 
control encourages most people to conform regardless of whether authority figures (such as law enforcement) are 
present. 
Values are not static. They change across time 
and between groups as people evaluate, debate, 
and change collective social beliefs. Values also 
vary from culture to culture. For example, cultures 
differ in their values about what kinds of physical 
closeness are appropriate in public. It’s rare to 
see two male friends or coworkers holding hands 
in the U.S. where that behavior often symbolizes 
romantic feelings. But in many nations, masculine 
physical intimacy is considered natural in public. 
This difference in cultural values came to light 
when people reacted to photos of former 
president G.W. Bush holding hands with the 
Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia in 2005. Simple 
gestures, such as handholding, carry great 
symbolic differences across cultures. 
Norms 
Norms are behaviors that reflect compliance with 
what cultures and societies have defined as good, right, and important. Most members adhere to them. Formal norms 
are established, written rules existing in all societies. They support many social institutions, such as the military, 
criminal justice and healthcare systems, and public schools. Laws are formal norms, but so are employee manuals, 
college entrance exam requirements, and “no running” signs at swimming pools. Formal norms are the most specific 
and clearly stated of the various types of norms, and they are the most strictly enforced. Informal norms are casual 
behaviors that are generally and widely conformed. People learn informal norms by observation, imitation, and general 
socialization. Informal norms dictate appropriate behaviors without the need of written rules and so may be difficult to 
learn when you are new to or not familiar with the culture.  
 
Figure 3.3   In many parts of Africa and the Middle East, it is 
considered normal for men to hold hands in friendship.  How 
might people in the United States interpret this scene? (Credit: 
Geordie Mott/Wikimedia Commons) 

 
 
Norms may be further classified as either mores or folkways. Mores (mor-ays) are norms that embody the moral views 
and principles of a group. They often have a religious foundation. Violating them can have serious consequences. The 
strongest mores are protected with laws and other formal sanctions. In most societies, for instance, homicide is 
considered immoral, and it’s punishable by law (a formal norm). But more often, mores are judged and guarded by 
public sentiment (an informal norm). People who violate mores are seen as shameful. Unlike mores, folkways are 
norms without any moral underpinnings. Rather, folkways direct appropriate behavior in the day-to-day practices and 
expressions of a culture. We can think of them as ‘traditions’—things we do because we ‘always have.’ They indicate 
whether to shake hands or kiss on the cheek when greeting another person. A folkway in one culture could be extremely 
rude in another. Folkways might be small actions, learned by observation and imitated, but they are by no means trivial. 
An important folkway in many cultures is kissing Grandmother on the cheek. Fail to do so and you will likely be scolded. 
Symbols and Culture 
Humans, consciously and subconsciously, are always striving to make sense of their surrounding world. Symbols—such 
as gestures, signs, objects, signals, and words—help people understand that world. They provide communication 
methods to understanding experiences by conveying recognizable meanings that are shared by societies. Some symbols 
are highly functional; stop signs, for instance, provide useful instruction. As physical objects, they belong to material 
culture, but because they function as symbols, they also convey nonmaterial cultural meanings.  
Symbols often get noticed when they are out of context. Used unconventionally, they convey strong messages. A stop 
sign placed on the door of a college building makes a political statement, as does a camouflage military jacket worn in 
an antiwar protest. Some symbols represent only one side of the story and elicit strong emotions, which can lead to 
social unrest. In 1989, crowds tore down the Berlin Wall, a decades-old symbol of the division between East and West 
Germany, communism, and capitalism. In the U.S. beginning in 2019, statues associated with slavery and the Civil War 
were removed from state capitols, college campuses, and public parks. In Germany, any display of Hitler or Nazi 
memorabilia or to deny the Holocaust is illegal. 
Language and Symbols 
While different cultures have varying systems of 
symbols, one system is common to all: language. 
Whatever its form, people learn social and cultural 
norms through it. Language is a system that uses 
symbols with which people communicate and 
through which culture is transmitted. Letters (which 
make up words), pictographs, and hand gestures 
are all symbols that create a language used for 
communication. All language systems contain the 
same basic elements that are effective in 
communicating ideas - object, subject, action. A 
written language system consists of symbols that 
refer to spoken sound. Taken together, these 
symbols convey specific meanings. The English 
language uses a combination of twenty-six letters 
to create words. These twenty-six letters make up 
over 600,000 recognized words (OED Online, 
2011). We can compare the reliance on tone and 
inflection to Mandarin Chinese. It contains over 8,000 characters, but the same character may symbolize different 
concepts depending on the tone used. 
English today contains an English and French version for the same concept. For example, in the English version, one 
eats, but in French version, one dines. In the English version, we meet someone. In the French version, we encounter 
someone. Readers of American English may be surprised by the inclusion of a ‘u’ in some spellings of words like 
 
Figure 3.4   Some road signs are universal. But how would you 
interpret the signage on the right? (Credit: Andrew Bain (left) 
flickr; HonzaSoukup (right) flickr) 

 
 
‘behaviour’ or ‘flavour.’ Americans have dropped that ‘u’ that writers of British English include. Billions of people speak 
English, and there are almost as many pronunciations of it. Rules for speaking and writing vary even within cultures, 
most notably by region. Do you eat a grinder, a sub, or a hero/gyro? Do you refer to a can of carbonated liquid as “soda” 
or “pop”?   
Language and Culture 
Even while it constantly evolves, language shapes our perception of reality and our behavior. In the 1920s, linguists 
Edward Sapir and Benjamin Whorf advanced this idea which became known as Sapir-Whorf hypothesis or linguistic 
relativity. It is based on the idea that people experience their world through their language and therefore understand 
their world through the cultural meanings embedded in their language. The hypothesis suggests that language shapes 
thought and by extension, behavior (Swoyer, 2003). For example, in the U.S. where the number thirteen is associated 
with bad luck, many high-rise buildings do not have a 13th floor. In Japan, however, the number four is considered 
unlucky, since it is pronounced similarly to the Japanese word for “death.” 
The Sapir-Whorf hypothesis has been interpreted to suggest that if a word does not exist in a language then users of 
that language cannot have the experience. Studies have shown, for instance, that unless people have access to the 
word “ambivalent,” they don’t recognize having conflicting positive and negative feelings about an issue as 
‘ambivalence.’ However, the hypothesis should not suggest that people do not have conflicting feelings but rather that 
they interpret the feelings differently. 
Nonverbal communication is symbolic, and, as in the case of language, is learned through one’s culture. Some gestures 
are nearly universal; some are not. Smiles often indicate positive reinforcement in the U.S., whereas in some cultures it 
is rude as you do not know the person. A thumbs-up in Russia and Australia is an offensive curse (Passero, 2002). Other 
gestures vary in meaning depending on the situation and the person. A wave of the hand can mean many things, 
depending on how it’s done and for whom. It may mean “hello,” “goodbye,” “no thank you,” or “I’m royalty.” Winks 
convey a variety of messages, including “We have a secret,” “I’m only kidding,” or “I’m attracted to you.” From a 
distance, a person may “read” the emotional situation of people just by watching their body language and facial 
expressions. However, many cultures communicate with lots of physicality, which people outside that culture may 
interpret as an argument. So, for example, you might believe two people are arguing when, in fact, they are simply 
having a regular conversation. 
High, Low, Pop, Sub, and Counter-culture  
It may seem obvious that there are a multitude of cultural differences between societies in the world. After all, we can 
easily see that people vary from one society to the next. It’s natural to think that a young woman from a village in rural 
Kenya in Eastern Africa would have a different view of the world from a young woman from urban Mumbai, India—one of 
the most populated cities in the world. Additionally, each culture has its own internal variations. Sometimes the 
differences between cultures are not as large as the differences within cultures. Sociologist Pierre Bourdieu wrote about 
cultural capital, which consists of material goods, non-material attitudes, and knowledge that are specific to a certain 
economic class. Bourdieu grouped cultural capital into three categories: embodied (a regional dialect), objectified 
(possessions), and institutionalized (academic credentials).  
Sociologists sometimes group culture into different categories. For instance, the term high culture is used by 
sociologists to describe the pattern of cultural experiences and attitudes that exist in the highest or elite class segments 
of a society. People often associate high culture with intellectualism, political power, and prestige. In America, high 
culture also tends to be associated with wealth. Events considered high culture can be expensive, formal, and exclusive 
– attending a ballet, seeing a play, listening to a live symphony performance, or attending a prestigious university. 
Similarly, low culture is associated with the pattern of cultural experiences and attitudes that exist in the lowest class 
segments of a society. 
The term popular culture refers to the pattern of cultural experiences and attitudes that exist in mainstream society. 
Popular culture events might include a parade, a baseball game, or the season finale of a television show. Music, 

 
 
anime, and cosplay are pieces of popular culture. Popular culture is accessible by most and is expressed and spread via 
commercial and social media outlets such as radio, television, movies, the music industry, publishers, and corporate-run 
websites. You can share a discussion of favorite football teams with a new coworker or comment on a reality show 
when making small talk in line at the grocery store. But if you tried to launch into a deep discussion on the classical 
Greek play Antigone, few members of U.S. society today would be familiar with it.  
A subculture is just what it sounds like—a smaller cultural group within a larger culture. Sub-culture members may want 
to change some things but established procedures are followed. People of a subculture are part of the larger culture but 
also share a specific identity within a smaller group. Thousands of subcultures exist within the U.S.  Ethnic and racial 
groups share the language, food, and customs of their heritage. Other subcultures are formed through shared 
experiences. Biker culture revolves around an interest in motorcycles. Some subcultures are formed by people who 
possess traits or preferences that differ from the majority of a society’s population. The body modification community 
embraces aesthetic additions to the human body, such as tattoos, piercings, and certain forms of plastic surgery. But 
even as members of a subculture band together, they still identify with and participate in the larger society.  
Sociologists distinguish subcultures from countercultures, which reject some of the larger culture’s norms and values. In 
contrast to subcultures, which operate relatively smoothly within the larger society, countercultures might actively defy 
larger society by developing their own set of rules 
and norms to live by, sometimes even creating 
communities that operate outside of greater 
society. Counterculture members are ‘against’ the 
dominant ruling culture and want to install their 
own values. For example, in the 1960s, people were 
working to reduce restricted freedom in the United 
States facing certain groups, leading to the civil 
rights and women’s movements. Counterculture 
may also take the form of what are often referred to 
as “cults.” Some cults claim to be spiritual, often 
establishing themselves as a religion. The group 
“Yearning for Zion” (YFZ) in Eldorado, Texas, existed 
outside the mainstream and the limelight, until its 
leader was accused of statutory rape and underage 
marriage. The sect’s formal norms clashed too 
severely to be tolerated by US law, and in 2008, 
authorities raided the compound and removed more 
than two hundred women and children from the property.  
Cultural Change 
Cultures continually change because new items are added to material culture every day and in turn, meanings are 
assigned to them (non-material), which affects other cultural components. Sociologists identify two broad categories of 
change as innovation (meaning new) and diffusion (to spread out). Material cultural change happens when new items 
are discovered or invented or enter a culture as a result of globalization. 
Innovation: Discovery and Invention 
An innovation refers to an object or concept’s initial appearance in society—it is innovative because it is new. 
Innovations are discovered or invented. Discoveries make known previously unknown but existing aspects of reality. 
Inventions result when something new is formed from existing objects or concepts—when things are put together in an 
entirely new manner. In the late 1800s and early 1900s, electric appliances were invented at an astonishing pace. Cars, 
airplanes, vacuum cleaners, lamps, radios, telephones, and televisions were all new inventions. Inventions may shape a 
culture by replacing older ways of carrying out tasks, being integrated into current practices, or creating new activities. 
Their adoption reflects (and may shape) cultural values, and their use may introduce new norms and practices. 
 
Figure 3.5   Cosplayers are a distinct subculture (a smaller 
cultural group within the larger culture) in the United States. 
And within the larger subculture are subgroups, such as this 
one emulating D.C. Comics characters. (Credit: Pat Loika) 

 
 
Technological gadgets that catch on quickly with 
one generation are sometimes dismissed by 
another generation. Material culture tends to 
diffuse more quickly than nonmaterial culture; 
technology can spread through society in a 
matter of months, but it can take generations 
for the ideas and beliefs of society to change 
including methods for researching or learning 
information (e.g., library versus Internet search). 
Coined by sociologist William F. Ogburn (1957), 
the term culture lag refers to the time that 
passes between the introduction of a new item 
of material culture and its social acceptance. 
Culture lag can also cause tangible problems. 
The infrastructure of the U.S., built a hundred 
years ago or more, is having trouble supporting 
today’s more heavily populated and fast-paced 
life. Yet there is a lag in conceptualizing 
solutions to infrastructure problems. 
Municipalities struggle with traffic control, 
increased air pollution, and limited parking, 
which are all symptoms of culture lag. Although 
people are becoming aware of the 
consequences, overuse, or lack of resources, 
addressing these needs takes time. 
 Diffusion and Globalization  
Another way material and nonmaterial culture crosses borders is through diffusion. Like a gas in a laboratory 
experiment, the item or idea spreads throughout. Diffusion relates to the process of the integration of cultures into the 
mainstream while globalization refers to the promotion and increase of interactions between different regions and 
populations around the globe resulting in the integration of markets and interdependence of nations fostered through 
trade. Ideas concepts, or artifacts are often diffused, or spread, to individuals and groups, resulting in new social 
practices. People might develop a new appreciation of Thai noodles or Italian gelato (ice cream). Access to television 
and the Internet has brought the lifestyles and values portrayed in U.S. sitcoms into homes around the globe and vice 
versa. Social media feeds from public demonstrations in one nation have encouraged political protesters in other 
countries. When this kind of diffusion occurs, ideas from one culture are introduced into another, often before the 
associated material objects.   
 
Figure 3.6   Technology Adoption Lifecycle — Sociologist Everett 
Rogers (1962) developed a model of the diffusion of 
innovations. As consumers gradually adopt a new innovation, 
the item grows toward 100 percent usage, or complete 
saturation within a society. This graph is frequently used in 
business, sales, technology, and cultural innovations. It can be 
used to describe how quickly different groups adopt (or begin 
using) a new technology or a new slang word, but note it is just 
a framework: not every innovation follows this exact pattern, 
but it provides a good foundation for discussion and prediction. 
(Graph attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under 
CC BY 4.0 license) 

 
 
3.3   Perspectives on Culture 
Music, fashion, technology, and values—all are 
products of culture. But what do they mean? How 
do sociologists using functionalism, conflict 
perspective, and symbolic interactionism 
perspectives perceive and interpret culture based 
on these material and nonmaterial items? 
Functionalists view society as a system in which 
all parts work—or function—together to create 
society as a whole. They often use the human 
body as an analogy. Looking at life in this way, 
societies need culture to exist. Cultural norms 
function to support the fluid operation of society, 
and cultural values guide people in making 
choices. Just as members of a society work 
together to fulfill a society’s needs, culture exists 
to meet its members’ social and personal needs. 
The theoretical frameworks described in Chapter 
1 help us evaluate the role of cultures in society. 
Functionalists also study culture in terms of 
values. For example, education is highly valued in 
the U.S. The culture of education—including 
material culture such as classrooms, textbooks, 
libraries, educational technology, dormitories and 
non-material culture such as specific teaching 
approaches—demonstrates how much emphasis 
is placed on the value of educating a society’s 
members. In contrast, if education consisted of 
only providing guidelines and some study 
material without the other elements, that would 
demonstrate that the culture places a lower value 
on education. Functionalists also view the 
different categories of culture as serving many 
functions. Having membership in a culture, a 
subculture, or a counterculture brings 
camaraderie and social cohesion and benefits 
the larger society by providing places for people 
who share similar ideas.  
Conflict perspective, however, views social 
structure as inherently unequal, based on power 
differentials. Conflict theorists argue that the historical experiences of certain groups— those based upon race, sex, or 
class, for instance, or those that portray a negative narrative about the dominant culture—are sometimes excluded from 
history books. For example, some historical accounts, like the 1921 Tulsa Massacre, were omitted or underrepresented 
but later reexamined by scholars and public discourse. When an episode of HBO’s Watchmen showcased the event in 
stunning and horrific detail, many people expressed surprise that it had occurred, and it hadn’t been taught or discussed 
(Ware 2019). Inequities often are embedded in laws, policies, and procedures, benefiting some groups more than 
others. Women were not allowed to vote in the U.S. until 1920, making it hard for them to get laws passed that 
protected their rights in the home and in the workplace. Same-sex couples were denied the right to marry in the U.S. 
 
Figure 3.7   This statue of Superman stands in the center of 
Metropolis, Illinois. His pedestal reads “Truth—Justice—The 
American Way.” How would a functionalist interpret this 
statue? What does it reveal about the values of American 
culture? (Credit: David Wilson/flickr) 
 
Figure 3.8   How does technology influence a society? Here, a 
NASA engineer is working with samples of a coating typically 
used in space flight, and which now may play a role in 
preserving artifacts and scientific specimens on earth. The 
space program is expensive, but throughout its history it has 
provided the U.S. significant advantages in scientific 
innovations. (Credit: NASA Goddard Space Flight Center/flickr) 

 
 
until 2015, although some individual states allowed same-sex marriage? However, at the core of conflict perspective is 
the effect of economic production and materialism. Conflict theorists believe that a society’s system of material 
production influences the rest of culture. They believe that people who have less power also have fewer opportunities to 
adapt to cultural change. Functionalists, by contract, focus on the purpose of culture—traditions, folkways, values—as a 
means of helping individuals navigate their lives.  and privilege created for some by using and reinforcing a dominant 
culture that sustains their position in society. 
Symbolic interactionism is the sociological perspective that is most concerned with the face-to-face interactions and 
cultural meanings between members of society. It is considered a micro-level analysis. Interactionists see culture as 
being created and maintained by the ways people interact and in how individuals interpret each other’s actions. Using 
this perspective, sociologists conceptualize human interaction as a continuous process of deriving meaning from both 
objects in the environment and the actions of others. Every object and action has a symbolic meaning, and language 
serves as a means for people to represent and communicate interpretations of these meanings to others. Symbolic 
interactionists perceive culture as highly dynamic and fluid, as it is dependent on how meaning is interpreted and how 
individuals interact when conveying these meanings. Interactionists research changes in language. They study additions 
and deletions of words, and the changing meaning of words. For example, a sociologist using a symbolic interactionist 
approach might explore how college students today behave on a first date to establish a sense of commitment to the 
other person. Some generations view a gift of flowers to another person on a first date as an important gesture of 
romance, whereas younger generations may view giving another person flowers as a behavior more typical of showing 
sympathy than romance. 
3.4   Types of Societies 
In sociological terms, society refers to a group of people who live in a definable community and share the same cultural 
components. On a broader scale, society consists of the people and institutions around us, our shared beliefs, and our 
cultural ideas.  
Consider China and the United States. They have a lot in common. Both are technologically advanced, have dense 
networks of transportation and communications, rely on foreign trading partners for large portions of their economies, 
focus on education to advance their citizens, and have large and expensive militaries. Both countries have citizens that 
may be largely satisfied with their governments and ways of life, while still holding some degree of distrust or discontent 
regarding their leaders. And both have significant differences in economic opportunities for people living in rural versus 
urban areas. An individual family or even a whole office full of people in one of the countries may look and act very 
similarly to families or offices in the other country. However, there are important differences between the countries, with 
many of these differences rooted in their social institutions like government, work and the economy. In China, a far 
greater percentage of people have manufacturing jobs than America. U.S. citizens can openly express their 
dissatisfaction with their government through social activism in person or, especially, online, but this is not allowed in 
China where American social media platforms are banned, and the press is controlled by the government.  
Sociologist Gerhard Lenski Jr. (1924–2015) defined societies in terms of their technological sophistication. As a society 
advances, so does its use of technology. Societies with rudimentary technology depend on the fluctuations of their 
environments, while industrialized societies have more control over the impact of their surroundings and thus develop 
different cultural features. This distinction is so important that sociologists generally classify societies along a spectrum 
of their level of industrialization—from preindustrial to industrial to postindustrial. 
Before the Industrial Revolution and the widespread use of machines, societies were small, rural, and dependent largely 
on local resources. Economic production was limited to the amount of labor a human being could provide, and there 
were few specialized occupations. The very first occupation was that of hunter-gatherer. 
Hunter-gatherer societies demonstrate the strongest dependence on the environment of the various types of 
preindustrial societies. As the basic structure of human society until about 10,000–12,000 years ago, these groups 
were based around kinship or tribes. Hunter-gatherers relied on their surroundings for survival—they hunted wild animals 
and foraged for uncultivated plants for food. When resources became scarce, the group moved to a new area to find 

 
 
sustenance, meaning they were nomadic. These societies were common until several hundred years ago, but today only 
a few hundred remain in existence. 
Changing conditions and adaptations led some societies to rely on the domestication of animals where circumstances 
permitted, called pastoral societies. Roughly 7,500 years ago, human societies began to recognize their ability to tame 
and breed animals and to grow and cultivate their own plants. Societies such as the Maasai villagers rely on the 
domestication of animals as a resource for survival. Unlike earlier hunter-gatherers who depended entirely on existing 
resources to stay alive, pastoral groups were able to breed livestock for food, clothing, and transportation, and they 
created a surplus of goods. These groups were nomadic because they had to follow their animals to fresh feeding 
grounds.  
Around the same time that pastoral societies were on the rise, other groups of people developed capacity to grow and 
cultivate plants. The depletion of a region’s crops or water supply forced pastoral societies to relocate in search of food 
sources for their livestock. Horticultural societies formed in areas where rainfall and other conditions allowed them to 
grow stable crops. Like hunter-gatherers, they largely depended on the environment for survival, but since they didn’t 
have to abandon their location to follow resources, they formed permanent settlements. This created more stability and 
more material goods and became the basis for the first revolution in human survival. 
While pastoral and horticultural societies used small, temporary tools such as digging sticks or hoes, agricultural 
societies relied on permanent tools for survival. Around 10,000 B.C.E., an explosion of new technology known as the 
Agricultural Revolution made farming possible—and profitable. Farmers learned to rotate the types of crops grown on 
their fields and to reuse waste products such as manure as fertilizer, which led to better harvests and bigger surpluses 
of food. New tools for digging and harvesting were made of metal, and this made them more effective and longer 
lasting. Human settlements grew into towns and cities, and particularly bountiful regions became centers of trade and 
commerce. People had the time and comfort to engage in contemplative and thoughtful activities, such as music, 
poetry, and philosophy. Craftspeople were able to support themselves through the production of creative, decorative, or 
thought-provoking aesthetic objects and writings. 
As resources became more plentiful, social classes became more divisive. Those who had more resources could afford 
better living, becoming the class of nobility. As cities expanded, ownership and preservation of resources became a 
pressing concern. The ninth century gave rise to feudal societies. These societies contained a strict hierarchical system 
of power based around land ownership and protection. The nobility, known as lords, placed vassals in charge of pieces 
of land. In return for the resources that the land provided, vassals promised to fight for their lords. These individual 
pieces of land, known as fiefdoms, were cultivated by lower classes. In return for maintaining the land, peasants were 
guaranteed a place to live and protection from outside enemies. Power was handed down through family lines, with 
peasant families serving lords over multiple generations.  
Ultimately, the social and economic system of feudalism failed and was replaced by capitalism due to the technological 
advances of the industrial era. In the eighteenth century, Europe experienced a dramatic rise in technological invention, 
ushering in an era known as the Industrial Revolution. What made this period remarkable was the number of new 
inventions that influenced people’s daily lives. Within a generation, tasks that required months of labor became 
achievable in a matter of days or hours.  
Before the Industrial Revolution, work was largely person- or animal-based and relied on human workers or horses to 
power mills and drive pumps. However, in 1782, James Watt and Matthew Boulton created a steam engine that could 
do the work of twelve horses by itself. Steam power began appearing everywhere, transforming a variety of industries to 
more rapidly produce products and with fewer workers, driving down the price of goods. Farmers were able to purchase 
mechanical seeders and threshing machines that caused agricultural productivity to soar. Products such as paper and 
glass became available to the average person, and the quality and accessibility of education and health care soared. 
Gas lights allowed increased visibility in the dark, and towns and cities developed a nightlife. These advances also gave 
rise to the formation of urban centers – big cities where factories were developed that provided jobs to many people. 
New technologists gave people new occupational opportunities, and wealth and upward mobility became an 
increasingly important social value.  

 
 
The discipline of sociology was born as people became aware of the important ways that rapid social changes affected 
everyday lives and culture during the industrial revolution. Social scientists observed changes in long-established 
traditions of the agricultural eras that no longer applied to life in the larger cities. Further, as larger groups of people 
moved to big cities, the cities were unable to handle housing and daily living for large numbers of people in compressed 
areas, leading to new challenges for governing and urban design. It was during this time that power moved from the 
hands of the aristocracy and “old money” to business-savvy newcomers who amassed fortunes in their lifetimes, 
controlling aspects of government as well. Eventually, concerns over the exploitation of workers led to the formation of 
labor unions and laws that set mandatory conditions for employees. Although the introduction of new technology at the 
end of the nineteenth century ended the industrial age, much of our social structure and social ideas—like family, 
childhood, and time standardization—have a basis in industrial society. 
Information societies, sometimes known as postindustrial or digital societies, are a recent development. Unlike 
industrial societies that are rooted in the production of material goods, information societies are based on the 
production of information and services. Digital technology is the steam engine of information societies. Since the 
economy of information societies is driven by knowledge and not material goods, power lies with those in charge of 
storing and distributing information. Members of a postindustrial society are likely to be employed as sellers of 
services—software programmers or business consultants, for example—instead of producers of goods. Social classes are 
divided by access to education, since without technical skills, people in an information society lack the means for 
success. 

 
 
3.5   Perspectives on Society 
While many sociologists have contributed to research on 
society and social interaction, three thinkers form the base of 
modern-day perspectives. Émile Durkheim, Karl Marx, and Max 
Weber developed different theoretical approaches to help us 
understand the way societies function.  
Émile Durkheim and Functionalism 
As a functionalist, Émile Durkheim’s (1858–1917) perspective 
on society stressed the necessary interconnectivity of all of its 
elements. To Durkheim, society was greater than the sum of its 
parts. He asserted that individual behavior was not the same 
as collective behavior and that studying collective behavior was 
quite different from studying an individual’s actions. Durkheim 
called the communal beliefs, morals, and attitudes of a society 
the collective conscience. In his quest to understand what 
causes individuals to act in similar and predictable ways, he 
wrote, “If I do not submit to the conventions of society, if in my 
dress I do not conform to the customs observed in my country 
and in my class, the ridicule I provoke, the social isolation in 
which I am kept, produce, although in an attenuated form, the 
same effects as punishment” (Durkheim 1895). Durkheim also 
believed that social integration, or the strength of ties that 
people have to their social groups, was a key factor in social 
life. 
Following the ideas of Comte and Spencer, Durkheim likened 
society to a living organism, in which each organ plays a 
necessary role in keeping the being alive. Even the socially 
deviant members of society are necessary, Durkheim argued, 
as punishments for deviance affirm established cultural values 
and norms. That is, punishment of a crime reaffirms our moral 
consciousness. “A crime is a crime because we condemn it,” Durkheim wrote in 1893. “An act offends the common 
consciousness not because it is criminal, but it is criminal because it offends that consciousness” (Durkheim 1893). 
Durkheim called these elements of society “social facts.” By this, he meant that social forces were to be considered real 
and existed outside the individual.  
As an observer of his social world, Durkheim was not entirely satisfied with the direction of society in his day. His 
primary concern was that the cultural glue that held society together was failing, and people were becoming more 
divided. In his book The Division of Labor in Society (1893), Durkheim argued that as society grew more complex, social 
order made the transition from mechanical to organic. 
Preindustrial societies, Durkheim explained, were held together by mechanical solidarity, a type of social order 
maintained by the collective conscience of a culture. Societies with mechanical solidarity act in a mechanical fashion; 
things are done mostly because they have always been done that way. This type of thinking was common in 
preindustrial societies where strong bonds of kinship and a low division of labor created shared morals and values 
among people, such as hunter-gatherer groups. When people tend to do the same type of work, Durkheim argued, they 
tend to think and act alike. 
In industrial societies, mechanical solidarity is replaced with organic solidarity, which is social order based around an 
acceptance of economic and social differences. In capitalist societies, Durkheim wrote, division of labor becomes so 
 
Figure 3.9   Billionaire philanthropist and former 
corporate CEO Warren Buffett’s ideas about 
taxation and spending habits of the very wealthy 
are controversial, particularly since they raise 
questions about America’s embedded system of 
class structure and social power. The three major 
sociological paradigms differ in their perspectives 
on these issues. (Credit: Medill DC/flickr) 

 
 
specialized that everyone is doing different things. Instead of punishing members of a society for failure to assimilate to 
common values, organic solidarity allows people with differing values to coexist. Laws exist as formalized morals and 
are based on restitution rather than revenge.  
While the transition from mechanical to organic solidarity is, in the long run, advantageous for a society, Durkheim 
noted that it can be a time of chaos and “normlessness.” One of the outcomes of the transition is something he called 
social anomie. Anomie—literally, “without law”—is a situation in which society no longer has the support of a firm 
collective consciousness. Collective norms are weakened. People, while more interdependent to accomplish complex 
tasks, are also alienated from each other. Anomie is experienced in times of social uncertainty, such as war or a great 
upturn or downturn in the economy. As societies reach an advanced stage of organic solidarity, they avoid anomie by 
redeveloping a set of shared norms. According to Durkheim, once a society achieves organic solidarity, it has finished its 
development. 
Karl Marx and Conflict  
Karl Marx (1818–1883) is certainly among the most significant social thinkers in recent history. While there are many 
critics of his work, it is still influential. For Marx, society’s constructions were predicated upon the idea of “base and 
superstructure.” This term refers to the idea that a society’s economic character forms its base, upon which rests the 
culture and social institutions, the superstructure. For Marx, it is the base (economy) that determines what a society will 
be like. 
Additionally, Marx saw conflict in society as the primary 
means of societal change. Economically, he saw conflict 
existing between the owners of the means of production—the 
bourgeoisie—and the laborers, called the proletariat. Marx 
maintained that these conflicts appeared consistently 
throughout history during times of social revolution. These 
revolutions or “class antagonisms” as he called them, were a 
result of one class dominating another. Most recently, with 
the end of feudalism, a new revolutionary class he called the 
bourgeoisie dominated the proletariat laborers. The 
bourgeoisie were revolutionary in the sense that they 
represented a radical change in the structure of society. In 
Marx’s words, “Society as a whole is more and more splitting 
up into two great hostile camps, into two great classes 
directly facing each other—Bourgeoisie and Proletariat” (Marx and Engels 1848). 
In the mid-nineteenth century, as industrialization was booming, industrial employers, the "owners of the means of 
production" in Marx's terms, became more and more exploitative toward the working class. Although industrialization 
did improve the living conditions of some workers over time, these improvements were uneven, and the tension 
between social classes driven by profit-related goals increased during this period. Large manufacturers often 
overworked laborers; Engels’s The Condition of the Working Class in England (1844) documented harsh conditions: 
“Such is the Old Town of Manchester, and on re-reading my description, I am forced to admit that instead of 
being exaggerated, it is far from black enough to convey a true impression of the filth, ruin, and 
uninhabitableness, the defiance of all considerations of cleanliness, ventilation, and health which characterize 
the construction of this single district, containing at least twenty to thirty thousand inhabitants. And such a 
district exists in the heart of the second city of England, the first manufacturing city of the world.” 
Conditions faced by the working class in factories became more visible during this time than in previous periods when 
families and communities worked together doing similar tasks. Safety of individual workers was not regulated, so work 
environments often were focused on production, not on the wellbeing of workers. As a result, factory owners often 
leveraged child labor, required long hours, and workers were often subjected to exposure to extreme conditions of heat, 
 
Figure 3.10   Karl Marx asserted that all elements of a 
society’s structure depend on its economic structure. 

 
 
cold, and toxic chemicals. Marx and Engels referred to capitalism, which is a way of organizing an economy so that the 
things that are used to make and transport products (such as land, oil, factories, ships, etc.) are owned by individual 
people and companies rather than by the government, as the “dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.” 
For Marx, what we do defines who we are. In historical terms, despite the persistent nature of one class dominating 
another, some element of humanity existed. There was at least some connection between the worker and the product, 
augmented by the natural conditions of seasons and the rise and fall of the sun, such as we see in an agricultural 
society. But with the bourgeoisie revolution and the rise of industry and capitalism, the worker now worked for wages 
alone. His relationship to his efforts was no longer of a human nature but based on artificial conditions. 
Marx described modern society in terms of alienation. Alienation refers to the condition in which the individual is 
isolated and divorced from his or her society, work, or the sense of self. Marx defined four specific types of alienation:  
1. Alienation from the product of one’s labor: An industrial worker does not have the opportunity to relate to the 
product he labors on. Instead of training for years as a watchmaker, an unskilled worker can get a job at a 
watch factory pressing buttons to seal pieces together. The worker does not care if he is making watches or 
cars, simply that the job exists. A worker on a Ford assembly line may spend all day installing windows on car 
doors without ever seeing the rest of the car. A cannery worker can spend a lifetime cleaning fish without ever 
knowing what product they are used for. 
2. Alienation from the process of one’s labor: A worker does not control the conditions of her job because she does 
not own the means of production. If a person is hired to work in a fast-food restaurant, she is expected to make 
the food the way she is taught. All ingredients must be combined in a particular order and in a particular 
quantity; there is no room for creativity or change. An employee at Burger King cannot decide to change the 
spices used on the fries in the same way that an employee on a Ford assembly line cannot decide to place a 
car’s headlights in a different position. Everything is decided by the bourgeoisie who then dictate orders to the 
laborers. 
3. Alienation from others: Workers compete, rather than cooperate. Employees vie for time slots, bonuses, and job 
security. Even when a worker clocks out at night and goes home, the competition does not end. As Marx 
commented in The Communist Manifesto (1848), “No sooner is the exploitation of the laborer by the 
manufacturer, so far at an end, that he receives his wages in cash, than he is set upon by the other portion of 
the bourgeoisie, the landlord, the shopkeeper, the pawnbroker.” 
4. Alienation from one’s self: A final outcome of industrialization is a loss of connectivity between a worker and her 
occupation. Because there is nothing that ties a 
worker to her labor, there is no longer a sense of 
self. Instead of being able to take pride in an 
identity such as being a watchmaker, automobile 
builder, or chef, a person is simply a cog in the 
machine. 
Taken as a whole, then, Marx argued that alienation in 
modern society means that an individual has no control 
over his life. Even in feudal societies, a person controlled 
the manner of his labor as to when and how it was carried 
out. But why, then, does the modern working class not rise 
up and rebel? (Indeed, Marx predicted that this would be 
the ultimate outcome and collapse of capitalism.) 
Marx proposed false consciousness as the explanation—
when prevailing cultural values lead people to accept social 
conditions that might not serve their interests. He argued 
 
Figure 3.11   Karl Marx (left) and Friedrich Engels (right) 
analyzed differences in social power between “have” and 
“have-not” groups. (Credit: Wikimedia Commons (left); 
George Lester/Wikimedia Commons (right)) 

 
 
that developing class consciousness—awareness of shared conditions—could inspire reform or revolution. 
Max Weber and Symbolic Interactionism 
While Karl Marx may be one of the best-known thinkers of the nineteenth century, Max Weber is certainly one of the 
greatest influences in the field of sociology. Like others, he was concerned with the important changes taking place in 
Western society with the advent of industrialization. And, like Marx and Durkheim, he feared that industrialization would 
have negative effects on individuals. 
Weber’s primary focus on the structure of society lay in the elements of class, status, and power. Similar to Marx, Weber 
saw class as economically determined. Society, he believed, was split between owners and laborers. Status, on the 
other hand, was based on noneconomic factors such as education, kinship, and religion. Both status and class 
determined an individual’s power, or influence over ideas. Unlike Marx, Weber believed that these ideas formed the 
base of society. 
Weber’s analysis of modern society centered on the concept 
of rationalization. A rational society is one built around logic 
and efficiency rather than morality or tradition. To Weber, 
capitalism is entirely rational. Although this leads to efficiency 
and merit-based success, it can have negative effects when 
taken to the extreme. In some modern societies, this is seen 
when rigid routines and strict design lead to a mechanized 
work environment and a focus on producing identical products 
in every location. 
Another example of the extreme conditions of rationality can 
be found in Charlie Chaplin’s classic film Modern Times 
(1936). Chaplin’s character performs a routine task to the 
point where he cannot stop his motions even while away from 
the job. Indeed, today we even have a recognized medical 
condition that results from such tasks, known as “repetitive 
stress syndrome.” 
Weber was also unlike his predecessors in that he was more 
interested in how individuals experienced societal divisions than in the divisions themselves. Symbolic interactionism, 
the third of the three most recognized perspectives in sociology, is based on Weber’s early ideas that emphasize the 
viewpoint of the individual and how that individual relates to society. For Weber, the culmination of industrialization, 
rationalization, and the like results in what he referred to as the iron cage, in which the individual is trapped by 
institutions and bureaucracy. This leads to a sense of “disenchantment of the world,” a phrase Weber used to describe 
the final condition of humanity. Indeed, a dark prediction, but one that has, at least to some degree, been borne out 
(Gerth and Mills 1918). In a rationalized, modern society, we have supermarkets instead of family-owned stores. We 
have chain restaurants instead of local eateries. Superstores that offer a multitude of merchandise have replaced 
independent businesses that focused on one product line, such as hardware, groceries, automotive repair, or clothing. 
Shopping malls offer retail stores, restaurants, fitness centers, even condominiums. This change may be rational, but is 
it universally desirable? 
3.6   Social Constructions of Reality 
Until now, we’ve primarily discussed the differences between societies. Rather than discuss their problems and 
configurations, we’ll now explore how society came to be and how sociologists view social interaction. 
In 1966 sociologists Peter Berger and Thomas Luckmann wrote a book called “The Social Construction of Reality.” In it, 
they argued that society is created by humans and human interaction, which they call habitualization. Habitualization 
describes how “any action that is repeated frequently becomes cast into a pattern, which can then be … performed 
 
Figure 3.12   An assembly line worker installs car 
parts with the aid of complex machinery. Has 
technology made this type of labor more or less 
alienating? (Credit: Carol Highsmith/Wikimedia 
Commons) 

 
 
again in the future in the same manner and with the same 
economical effort” (Berger and Luckmann 1966). Not only 
do we construct our own society but we also accept it as it is 
because others have created it before us. Society is, in fact, 
“habit.”  
For example, your school exists as a school and not just as a 
building because you and others agree that it is a school. If 
your school is older than you are, it was created by the 
agreement of others before you. In a sense, it exists by 
consensus, both prior and current. This is an example of the 
process of institutionalization, the act of implanting a 
convention or norm into society. Bear in mind that the 
institution, while socially constructed, is still quite real. 
Another way of looking at this concept is through W.I. 
Thomas’s notable Thomas theorem which states, “If men 
define situations as real, they are real in their 
consequences” (Thomas and Thomas 1928). That is, 
people’s behavior can be determined by their subjective 
construction of reality rather than by objective reality. For 
example, a teenager who is repeatedly given a label — overachiever, player, jock — might live up to the term even 
though it initially wasn’t a part of his character. 
Like Berger and Luckmann in their description of habitualization, Thomas states that our moral codes and social norms 
are created by “successive definitions of the situation.” This concept is defined by sociologist Robert K. Merton as a self-
fulfilling prophecy. Merton explains that with a self-fulfilling prophecy, even a false idea can become true if it is acted 
upon. One example he gives is of a “bank run.” Say for some reason, a number of people falsely fear that their bank is 
soon to be bankrupt. Because of this false notion, people run to their bank and demand all of their cash at once. As 
banks rarely, if ever, have that much money on hand, the bank does indeed run out of money, fulfilling the customers’ 
prophecy. Here, reality is constructed by an idea. 
Symbolic interactionists offer another lens through which to analyze the social construction of reality. With a theoretical 
perspective focused on the symbols (like language, 
gestures, and artifacts) that people use to interact, this 
approach is interested in how people interpret those 
symbols in daily interactions. Interactionists also recognize 
that language and body language reflect our values. One 
has only to learn another language to know that not every 
English word can be translated. The same is true for 
gestures. While Americans might recognize a “thumbs up” 
as meaning “great,” in Germany it would mean “one” and 
in Japan it would mean “five.” Thus, our construction of 
reality is influenced by our symbolic interactions. 
Roles and Status 
As you can imagine, people employ many types of 
behaviors in day-to-day life. Roles are patterns of behavior 
that we recognize in each other that are representative of a 
person’s social status. Currently, while reading this text, 
you are playing the role of a student. However, you also 
 
Figure 3.14   Who are we? What role do we play in 
society? According to sociologists, we construct reality 
through our interactions with others. In a way, our day-
to-day interactions are like those of actors on a stage. 
(Credit: Jan Lewandowski/flickr) 
 
Figure 3.13   Cubicles are used to maximize individual 
workspace in an office. Such structures may be 
rational, but they are also isolating. (Credit: Tim 
Patterson/flickr) 

 
 
play other roles in your life, such as “daughter,” “neighbor,” or “employee.” These various roles are each associated with 
a different status. 
 Sociologists use the term status to describe the 
responsibilities and benefits that a person experiences 
according to their rank and role in society. Some statuses 
are ascribed—those you do not select, such as son, old 
person, or female. Others, called achieved statuses, are 
obtained by choice, such as a high school dropout, self-made 
millionaire, or nurse. As a daughter or son, you occupy a 
different status than as a neighbor or employee. One person 
can be associated with a multitude of roles and statuses. 
Even a single status such as “student” has a complex role-
set, or array of roles, attached to it (Merton 1957). It is 
important to note that status refers to the rank in social 
hierarchy, while role is the behavior expected of a person 
holding a certain status. 
If too much is required of a single role, individuals can 
experience role strain. Consider the duties of a parent: 
cooking, cleaning, driving, problem-solving, acting as a 
source of moral guidance—the list goes on. Similarly, a 
person can experience role conflict when one or more roles 
are contradictory. A parent who also has a full-time career 
can experience role conflict on a daily basis. When there is a 
deadline at the office but a sick child needs to be picked up 
from school, which comes first? When you are working 
toward a promotion but your children want you to come to 
their school play, which do you choose? Being a college 
student can conflict with being an employee, being an athlete, or even being a friend. Our roles in life have a great effect 
on our decisions and who we become. 
 
Figure 3.15   The story line of a self-fulfilling prophecy 
appears in many literary works, perhaps most 
famously in the story of Oedipus. Oedipus is told by an 
oracle that he will murder his father and marry his 
mother. In going out of his way to avoid his fate, 
Oedipus inadvertently fulfills it. Oedipus’s story 
illustrates one way in which members of society 
contribute to the social construction of reality. (Credit: 
Jean-Antoine-Theodore Giroust/Wikimedia Commons) 

 
 
Presentation of Self 
Of course, it is impossible to look inside a person’s head and study what role they are playing. All we can observe is 
behavior, or role performance. Role performance is how a person expresses his or her role. Sociologist Erving Goffman 
presented the idea that a person is like an actor on a stage. 
Calling his theory dramaturgy, Goffman believed that we 
use “impression management” to present ourselves to 
others as we hope to be perceived. Each situation is a new 
scene, and individuals perform different roles depending on 
who is present (Goffman 1959). Think about the way you 
behave around your coworkers versus the way you behave 
around your grandparents versus the way you behave with 
a blind date. Even if you’re not consciously trying to alter 
your personality, your grandparents, coworkers, and date 
probably see different sides of you. 
As in a play, the setting matters as well. If you have a group 
of friends over to your house for dinner, you are playing the 
role of a host. It is agreed upon that you will provide food 
and seating and probably be stuck with a lot of the cleanup 
at the end of the night. Similarly, your friends are playing 
the roles of guests, and they are expected to respect your 
property and any rules you may set forth (“Don’t leave the 
door open or the cat will get out.”). In any scene, there 
needs to be a shared reality between players. In this case, if 
you view yourself as a guest and others view you as a host, there are likely to be problems. 
 Impression management is a critical component of symbolic interactionism. For example, a judge in a courtroom has 
many “props” to create an impression of fairness, gravity, and control—like their robe and gavel. Those entering the 
courtroom are expected to adhere to the scene being set. Just imagine the “impression” that can be made by how a 
person dresses. This is the reason that attorneys frequently select the hairstyle and apparel for witnesses and 
defendants in courtroom proceedings. 
Goffman’s dramaturgy ideas expand on the ideas of Charles 
Cooley and the looking-glass self. According to Cooley, we 
base our image on what we think other people see (Cooley 
1902). We imagine how we must appear to others, then 
react to this speculation. We wear certain clothes, prepare 
our hair in a particular manner, wear makeup, use cologne, 
and the like—all with the notion that our presentation of 
ourselves is going to affect how others perceive us. We 
expect a certain reaction, and, if lucky, we get the one we 
desire and feel good about it. But more than that, Cooley 
believed that our sense of self is based upon this idea: we 
imagine how we look to others, draw conclusions based 
upon their reactions to us, and then we develop our personal 
sense of self. In other words, people’s reactions to us are like 
a mirror in which we are reflected. 
 
 
Figure 3.16   Parents often experience role strain or 
role conflict as they try to balance different and often 
urgent competing responsibilities. (Credit: Ran 
Zwigenberg/flickr) 
 
Figure 3.17   A judge’s gavel is known as a prop 
designed to add gravity and ceremony to the 
proceedings. (Credit: Brian Turner/flickr) 

 
 
Key Terms 
achieved status: the status a person chooses, such as a level of education or income 
agricultural societies: societies that rely on farming as a way of life 
alienation: an individual’s isolation from his society, his work, and his sense of self 
anomie: a situation in which society no longer has the support of a firm collective consciousness 
beliefs: tenets or convictions that people hold to be true 
bourgeoisie: the owners of the means of production in a society 
capitalism: a way of organizing an economy so that the things that are used to make and transport products (such as 
land, oil, factories, ships, etc.) are owned by individual people and companies rather than by the government 
class consciousness: the awareness of one’s rank in society 
collective conscience: the communal beliefs, morals, and attitudes of a society 
countercultures: groups that reject and oppose society’s widely accepted cultural patterns 
cultural universals: patterns or traits that are globally common to all societies 
culture: shared beliefs, values, and practices 
culture lag: the gap of time between the introduction of material culture and nonmaterial culture’s acceptance of it 
diffusion: the spread of material and nonmaterial culture from one culture to another 
discoveries: things and ideas found from what already exists 
ethnocentrism: the tendency to evaluate or judge another culture based on one’s own cultural norms 
folkways: direct, appropriate behavior in the day-to-day practices and expressions of a culture 
false consciousness: a condition in which the beliefs, ideals, or ideology of a person are not in the person’s own best 
interest 
feudal societies: societies that operate on a strict hierarchical system of power based around land ownership and 
protection 
formal norms: established, written rules 
globalization: the integration of international trade and finance markets 
habitualization: the idea that society is constructed by us and those before us, and it is followed like a habit 
high culture: the cultural patterns of a society’s elite 
horticultural societies: societies based around the cultivation of plants 
hunter-gatherer societies: societies that depend on hunting wild animals and gathering uncultivated plants for survival 
ideal culture: the standards a society would like to embrace and live up to 
iron cage: a situation in which an individual is trapped by social institutions 
industrial societies: societies characterized by a reliance on mechanized labor to create material goods 
informal norms: casual behaviors that are generally and widely conformed to 

 
 
information societies: societies based on the production of nonmaterial goods and services 
innovations: new objects or ideas introduced to culture for the first time 
inventions: a combination of pieces of existing reality into new forms 
institutionalization: the act of implanting a convention or norm into society 
language: a symbolic system of communication 
looking-glass self: our reflection of how we think we appear to others 
mechanical solidarity: a type of social order maintained by the collective consciousness of a culture 
mores: the moral views and principles of a group 
norms: the visible and invisible rules of conduct through which societies are structured 
organic solidarity: a type of social order based around an acceptance of economic and social differences 
pastoral societies: societies based around the domestication of animals 
popular culture: mainstream, widespread patterns among a society’s population 
proletariat: the laborers in a society 
rationalization: a belief that modern society should be built around logic and efficiency rather than morality or tradition 
real culture: the way society really is based on what actually occurs and exists 
role conflict: a situation when one or more of an individual’s roles clash 
role performance: the expression of a role 
role strain: stress that occurs when too much is required of a single role 
role-set: an array of roles attached to a particular status 
roles: patterns of behavior that are representative of a person’s social status 
sanctions: a way to authorize or formally disapprove of certain behaviors 
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis: the way that people understand the world based on their form of language 
self-fulfilling prophecy: an idea that becomes true when acted upon 
social integration: how strongly a person is connected to his or her social group 
society: a group of people who live in a definable community and share the same cultural components 
social control: a way to encourage conformity to cultural norms 
society: people who live in a definable community and who share a culture 
status: the responsibilities and benefits that a person experiences according to his or her rank and role in society 
subcultures: groups that share a specific identification, apart from a society’s majority, even as the members exist 
within a larger society 
symbols: gestures or objects that have meanings associated with them that are recognized by people who share a 
culture 

 
 
Thomas theorem: how a subjective reality can drive events to develop in accordance with that reality, despite being 
originally unsupported by objective reality 
values: a culture’s standard for discerning what is good and just in society 
 
References 
3.1   What Is Culture? 
Amazon.com. 2020. Search for Humor Studies. “1-16 of over 40,000 results for Books : “humor studies””. Retrieved 
October 6, 2020. (Amazon.com) 
Barger, Ken. 2008. “Ethnocentrism.” Indiana University, July 1. Retrieved May 2, 2011 
(http://www.iupui.edu/~anthkb/ethnocen.htm). 
Darwin, Charles R. 1871. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex. London: John Murray. 
DuBois, Cora. 1951. “Culture Shock.” Presentation to Panel Discussion at the First Midwest Regional Meeting of the 
Institute of International Education.” November 28. Also presented to the Women’s Club of Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil, August 3, 1954. 
Fritz, Thomas, S and Jentschke, N. Gosselin, et al. 2009. “Universal Recognition of Three Basic Emotions in Music.” 
Current Biology 19(7). 
Jankowiak, William and Nelson, Alex. 2021. “Does Love Always Come Before Marriage.” Sapiens.org. February 11, 
2021. (https://www.sapiens.org/culture/love-and-marriage) 
Murdock, George P. 1949. Social Structure. New York: Macmillan. 
National Statistical Office (NSO) [Papua New Guinea] and ICF. 2019. Papua New Guinea Demographic and Health Survey 
2016-18. Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, and Rockville, Maryland, USA: NSO and ICF. Retrieved 
https://dhsprogram.com/publications/publication-fr364-dhs-final-reports.cfm. 
Oberg, Kalervo. 1960. “Cultural Shock: Adjustment to New Cultural Environments.” Practical Anthropology 7:177–182. 
Old Dominion University. ‘Journal of International Students’. Accessed October 16, 2020. 
(https://www.ojed.org/index.php/jis/index) 
Smithsonian Institution. Natural History Museum. What does it mean to be human? Retrieved October 6, 2020. 
(https://humanorigins.si.edu/human-characteristics/social-life) 
Sumner, William G. 1906. Folkways: A Study of the Sociological Importance of Usages, Manners, Customs, Mores, and 
Morals. New York: Ginn and Co. 
Swoyer, Chris. 2003. “The Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by E. N. 
Zalta, Winter. Retrieved May 5, 2011 (http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2003/entries/davidson/) 
3.2   Elements of Culture 
Boroditsky, Lera & Schmidt, Lauren. (2000). Sex, Syntax, and Semantics. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Meeting of the 
Cognitive Science Society. 
Eberhard, David M., Gary F. Simons, and Charles D. Fennig (eds.). 2020. Ethnologue: Languages of the World. Twenty-
Third edition. Dallas, Texas: SIL International. Online version http://www.ethnologue.com 

 
 
Lucy, J. (1997). Linguistic Relativity. Annual Review of Anthropology, 26, 291-312. Retrieved January 31, 2021, from 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2952524 
Mount, Steve. 2010. “Constitutional Topic: Official Language.” USConstitution.net, last modified January 24. Retrieved 
January 3, 2012 (http://www.USconstitution.net/consttop_lang.html). 
National WWII Museum. 2020. “American Indian Code Talkers”. New Orleans, LA. Retrieved October 11, 2020. 
(https://www.nationalww2mUSeum.org/war/articles/american-indian-code-talkers). 
OED Online. 2011. Oxford University Press. Retrieved May 5, 2011 
(http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/260911).http://openstax.org/books/introduction-sociology-3e/pages/3-3-
high-low-pop-sub-counter-culture-and-cultural-change 
Ogburn, William F. 1957. “Cultural Lag as Theory.” Sociology & Social Research 41(3):167–174. 
Passero, Kathy. 2002. “Global Travel Expert Roger Axtell Explains Why.” Biography July:70–73,97–98. 
Salminen S, Johansson A. Occupational accidents of Finnish- and Swedish-speaking workers in Finland: a mental model 
view. Int J Occup Saf Ergon. 2000;6(2):293-306. doi: 10.1080/10803548.2000.11076456. PMID: 10927671 
Scheuerman, William. 2010. “Globalization.” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by E. N. 
Slavin, R. E., A. Cheung, C. Groff, and C. Lake. 2008. “Effective Reading Programs for Middle and High Schools: A Best-
Evidence Synthesis.” Reading Research Quarterly 43(3):290–322. 
Social Register Association. 2020. New York. https://www.socialregisteronline.com/ 
Sumner, William G. 1906. Folkways: A Study of the Sociological Importance of Usages, Manners, Customs, Mores, and 
Morals. New York: Ginn and Co. 
Swoyer, Chris. 2003. “The Linguistic Relativity Hypothesis.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by E. N. 
Zalta, Winter. Retrieved May 5, 2011 
(http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2003/entries/relativism/supplement2.html). 
Vaughan, R. M. 2007. “Cairo’s Man Show.” Utne Reader March–April:94–95. 
Weber, Bruce. 2001. “Harold Garfinkel, a Common-Sense Sociologist, Dies at 93.” The New York Times, May 3. 
Retrieved February 10, 2012 (http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/04/US/04garfinkel.html?_r=2) 
Westcott, Kathryn. 2008. “World’s Best-Known Protest Symbol Turns 50.” BBC News, March 20. Retrieved January 3, 
2012 (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/magazine/7292252.stm). 
Weston, J. (Director). (2002). Wild Child: The Story of Feral Children [Motion Picture]. 
Zalta, Summer. Retrieved February 10, 2012 (http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2010/entries/globalization/). 
3.3   Perspectives on Culture 
Jacobs, Harrison. 2019. “North Koreans understand their government lies, but there’s one thing they don’t know, 
according to a defector.” Business Insider. (https://www.businessinsider.com/what-north-koreans-dont-
understand-about-world-defector-news-2018-6) 
Ware, Lawrence. 2019. “Watchmen’s Tulsa Massacre Is American History. It’s Also Mine.” Slate. October 25 2019. 
(https://slate.com/culture/2019/10/watchmen-tulsa-massacre-history-tv.html) 

 
 
3.4   Types of Societies 
Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada. 2005. “Israel: Treatment of Bedouin, Including Incidents of Harassment, 
Discrimination or Attacks; State Protection (January 2003–July 2005)”, Refworld, July 29. Retrieved February 
10, 2012 (http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/440ed71325.html).  
Kjeilen, Tore. “Bedouin.” Looklex.com. Retrieved February 17, 2012 (http://looklex.com/index.htm). 
University of Michigan. n.d. "The Curse of Oil in Ogoniland". Retrieved January 2, 2015 
(http://www.umich.edu/~snre492/cases_03-04/Ogoni/Ogoni_case_study.htm). 
3.5   Perspectives on Society 
Durkheim, Émile. 1960 [1893]. The Division of Labor in Society. Translated by George Simpson. New York: Free Press. 
Durkheim, Émile. 1982 [1895]. The Rules of the Sociological Method. Translated by W. D. Halls. New York: Free Press. 
Engels, Friedrich. 1892. The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 1844. London: Swan Sonnenschein & Co. 
Geographia. 1998. “The Bedouin Way.” Geograpia.com. Retrieved January 4, 2012 
(http://www.geographia.com/egypt/sinai/bedouin02.htm). 
Gerth, H. H., and C. Wright Mills. 1946. From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels. 1998 [1848]. The Communist Manifesto. New York: Penguin Group. 
3.6   Social Constructions of Reality 
Berger, P. L., and T. Luckmann. 1966. The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge. 
Garden City, NY: Anchor Books. 
Cooley, Charles H. 1902. Human Nature and the Social Order. New York: Scribner's. 
Goffman, Erving. 1959. The Presentation of Self In Everyday Life. New York: Doubleday. 
Merton, Robert K. 1957. “The Role-Set: Problems in Sociological Theory.” British Journal of Sociology 8(2):110–113. 
Thomas, W.I., and D.S. Thomas. 1928. The Child in America: Behavior Problems and Programs. New York: Knopf.