Chapter 5: Healthy Aging 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Nine-year old twins Osiris and Joli loved making meals with Bibi, their grandmother. Osiris loved the cooking; Joli loved 
eating the ingredients. The kids didn't get very involved with preparing the chicken but perked up with the fufu and 
almost took over the dough balls. Bibi yelled at Joli to stop eating raw batter, but she didn't mean it. 
Bibi loved having them around. She sang mash-ups of 1990s songs and big band music, mixing in funny mentions of 
their day-to-day lives. As she prepped the cassava, she'd throw the discarded pieces in a waste bowl like she was playing 
basketball. Bibi told them a story about how one of her schoolteachers was so young that all the students thought she 
was one of them. “So when she told us her last name, I thought it was her first name and called her by it. So, she sent 
me outside for punishment!” 
The kids burst into peals of laughter. Bibi joined in as she moved 
a pan.  
Suddenly the stove erupted in flame. The oil in the pan had 
spilled over. Bibi grabbed a glass of water on the table. Joli 
screamed at her to stop, but Bibi had already thrown the water 
onto the oil. The flames flared and splattered across the stove 
and onto the counter. A paper towel caught fire. Everyone was 
screaming. Osiris and Joli's mother, Gloria, was in the room a 
moment later. Pushing Bibi away, she turned off the stove and 
threw a towel on some of the flames. She took a fire 
extinguisher from the cabinet and, after a few seconds of 
fiddling with the pin and hose, emptied it onto the fire. 
“Mom!” Gloria yelled. “Why would you put water on an oil fire? 
You know that's the last thing to do!” 
Bibi, in the corner, seemed to hold on to the wall to remain 
standing. She shook her head and looked at the children. “It's a 
fire. You put water on it.” 
“No you don't. You taught me never to do that. You told me to 
use salt...anything but water. You could have burned down the 
house!” 
Bibi was crying. She looked at the children and sank toward the floor. “I don't remember that. I'm so sorry. It's a fire, I 
thought. Put water on it.” Gloria sent the children out of the room and sat her mother down. 
5.1   Older adults in Society  
5.2   The Process of Aging  
5.3   Challenges Facing Older Adults 
5.4   Theoretical Perspectives on Aging 
 
Figure 5.1   Older people, especially family 
members, can foster a connection between our 
past and present and help build our memories 
and identities. But they sometimes need 
unexpected help, which they do not always 
accept. (Credit: PWRDF/flickr) 

 
 
Aside from the scare from the fire, why might Bibi be crying? What difficulties and joys do older people experience in 
their day-to-day activities? What opportunities and challenges do their family members face? In this chapter, we will 
explore the identities and issues of older people in our societies and consider our attitudes and obligations toward them. 
5.1   Older Adults in Society 
Think of the streaming series you have watched recently. Did any of them feature older actors and actresses? What 
roles did they play? How were these older actors portrayed? Were they cast as main characters in a love story? Did they 
seem fully capable, safe, productive, and happy? Or were they a challenge to those around them? Were they grouchy or 
overly set in their ways? 
Although the representation of older people in the media has increased over the last decade in particular, many media 
portrayals of older adults reflect negative cultural attitudes 
toward aging. In the United States, society tends to glorify youth 
and associate it with beauty and sexuality. In comedies, older 
adults are often associated with grumpiness, hostility, or even 
senility. Rarely do the roles of older people convey the fullness 
of life experienced by seniors—as employees, lovers, or the 
myriad roles they have in real life. What values does this 
reflect? 
One hindrance to society’s fuller understanding of aging is that 
people rarely understand the process of aging until they reach 
old age themselves. This lack of understanding is in stark 
contrast to our perspective on childhood, something we've all 
experienced. And as is often the case with a lack of knowledge 
or understanding, it leads to myths, assumptions, and 
stereotypes about older adults and the aging process. While 
stereotypes associated with race and gender may lead to more 
critical thought and sensitivity, many people accept age 
stereotypes without question (Levy 2002). Each culture has a 
certain set of expectations and assumptions about aging, all of 
which are part of our socialization. 
While the landmarks of maturing into adulthood are a source of pride, often celebrated at major milestones like First 
Communion, Bar Mitzvah, or Quinceañera, signs of natural aging can be cause for shame or embarrassment. Some 
people avoid acknowledging their aging by rejecting help when they need it, which can lead to physical injury or 
problems obtaining needed items or information. For example, when vaccinations for the COVID-19 virus became 
available, U.S. seniors who didn't have help from family and friends lagged significantly in receiving vaccines; this 
occurred despite of the fact that older adults were known to be the highest risk group and were the most susceptible to 
illness and death if they were infected (Graham 2021). Those older adults who were resistant to reach out for help may 
have waited too long, and their neighbors or other community members may not have known they needed the help. 
Why would they take this risk? Researchers aim to uncover the motivations and challenges that may result in these 
circumstances and behavior. 
Gerontology is a field of science that seeks to understand the process of aging and the challenges encountered as older 
adults grow older. Gerontologists investigate age, aging, and the aged. Gerontologists study what it is like to be an older 
adult in a society and the ways that aging affects members of a society. As a multidisciplinary field, gerontology 
includes the work of medical and biological scientists, social scientists, and even financial and economic scholars. 
Social gerontology refers to a specialized field of gerontology that examines the social (and sociological) aspects of 
aging. Researchers focus on developing a broad understanding of the experiences of people at specific ages, such as 
mental and physical wellbeing, plus age-specific concerns such as the process of dying. Social gerontologists work as 
 
Figure 5.2   Older adults may not always conform to 
society's expectations of their attitudes or their 
abilities. While we don't know whether or not these 
marathon participants are running competitively, 
it's clear the older person in the foreground is 
ahead of many younger people. (Credit: Mike 
Kaden/flickr) 

 
 
social researchers, counselors, community organizers, and service providers for older adults. Because of their 
specialization, social gerontologists are in a strong position to advocate for older adults. 
Scholars in these disciplines have learned that “aging” reflects not only the physiological process of growing older but 
also our attitudes and beliefs about the aging process. You’ve likely seen online calculators that promise to determine 
your “real age” as opposed to your chronological age. These ads target the notion that people may “feel” a different age 
than their actual years. Some sixty-year-olds feel frail and old, while some eighty-year-olds feel sprightly. 
In the United States, the experience of being old has 
changed greatly over the past century. In the late 
1800s and early 1900s, many U.S. households were 
home to multigenerational families, and the 
experiences and wisdom of elders was respected. 
Multigenerational U.S. families began to decline after 
World War II, and their numbers reached a low point 
around 1980, but they are consistently on the rise. A 
2010 Pew Research Center analysis of census data 
found that 49 million people in the United States lived 
in a family household with at least two adult 
generations—or a grandparent and at least one other 
generation a record at the time. By 2016, that number 
had grown to 64 million people living in 
multigenerational households, roughly 20 percent of 
the population (Cohn 2018). 
Attitudes toward older adults have also been affected 
by large societal changes that have happened over the 
past 100 years. Researchers believe industrialization 
and modernization have contributed greatly to lowering 
the power, influence, and prestige older adults once held. On the other hand, the sheer numbers of older adults in 
certain societies can have other effects, such as older people's influence on policies and politics based on their voting 
influence. During the COVID-19 pandemic, experts weighed in about whether age should be a factor in determining 
whether hospitals should perform lifesaving treatments, leading to heated debates about age discrimination. 
Older adults have both benefited and suffered from these rapid social changes. In modern societies, a strong economy 
created new levels of prosperity for many people. Healthcare has become more widely accessible, and medicine has 
advanced, which allows older adults to live longer. However, older people are not as essential to the economic survival 
of their families and communities as they were in the past. 
Studying Aging Populations 
Since its creation in 1790, the U.S. Census Bureau has been tracking age in the population. Age is an important factor 
to analyze with accompanying demographic figures, such as income and health. The population chart below shows 
projected age distribution patterns for the next several decades. Statisticians use data to calculate the median age of a 
population, that is, the number that marks the halfway point in a group’s age range. In the United States, the median 
age is about forty (U.S. Census Bureau 2010). That means that about half of the people in the United States are under 
forty and about half are over forty. This median age has been increasing, which indicates the population as a whole is 
growing older. 
A cohort is a group of people who share a statistical or demographic trait. People belonging to the same birth cohort 
were born in the same time frame. Understanding a population’s age composition can point to certain social and 
cultural factors and help governments and societies plan for future social and economic challenges. 
 
Figure 5.3   How old are these people? In modern U.S. 
society, appearance is not a reliable indicator of age. In 
addition to genetic differences, health habits, hair dyes, and 
attitudes make traditional signs of aging increasingly 
unreliable. (Credit: Jason Hargrove/flickr) 

 
 
Sociological studies on aging might help explain the difference between Native American age cohorts and the general 
population. While Native American societies have a strong tradition of revering their elders, they also have a lower life 
expectancy because of lack of access to healthcare and high levels of mercury in fish, which is a traditional part of their 
diet. 
Phases of Aging: The Young-Old, Middle-Old, and Old-Old 
In the United States, all people over eighteen years old are considered adults, but there is a large difference between a 
person who is twenty-one years old and a person who is forty-five years old. More specific breakdowns, such as “young 
adult” and “middle-aged adult,” are helpful. In the same way, groupings clarify different phases in later life. Older adults 
are often lumped together to include everyone over the age of sixty-five. But a sixty-five-year-old’s experience of life is 
often much different from a ninety-year-old’s. 
Some researchers think about later life as consisting of three life-stage subgroups: the young-old (approximately sixty-
five to seventy-four years old), the middle-old (ages seventy-five to eighty-four years old), and the old-old (over age 
eighty-five). Centenarians (i.e., those 100 and older) are often evaluated as a subset of the oldest-old. Today’s young-old 
age group is generally happier, healthier, and financially better off than the young-old of previous generations. In the 
United States, people are better able to prepare for aging because resources are more widely available. Paying attention 
to these life stages is important because different life decisions are needed for different phases of late life. For instance, 
as we get older, our likelihood of needing care from others increases. Family members may respond to these growing 
needs only once an old person reaches a health crisis. In this case, older people may be faced with having fewer choices 
about how they want to be cared for because they haven’t created any specific plans. By being more aware of what the 
future holds by discussing plans or making legal arrangements or even preparing financially, older adults are able to 
have more autonomy and control if and when their health declines. Living wills, retirement planning, and medical power 
of attorney are other concerns that are 
increasingly handled in advance. 
The Graying of the US 
What does it mean to be old? Some 
define it as an issue of physical health, 
while others simply define it by 
chronological age. The U.S. government, 
for example, has defined old age based 
on specific social policies in which people 
qualify when they reach a certain age 
(e.g., Social Security and Medicare). The 
World Health Organization has no 
standard, other than noting that sixty-five 
years old is the commonly accepted 
definition in most core nations, but in 
countries with lower life expectancies, old 
age seems to come sooner due to more 
accelerated physiological aging, and in 
these countries, people who are age 55 
are often considered “old.” AARP 
(formerly the American Association of Retired Persons) is a policy advocacy organization for older adults in the United 
States. AARP identifies those who are age 50 or older as “old enough” to participate and eligible for membership. It is 
interesting to note AARP’s name change; by taking the word “retired” out of its name, the organization can broaden its 
base to any older people in the United States, not just retirees. This is especially important now that many people are 
working to age seventy and beyond. 
 
Figure 5.4   This population chart shows the population size of people in 
different age groups. The youngest age group, at the bottom, remains 
largely static. The 18-64 age group has been growing and will continue 
to do so. But most notable is the increasing size of the third tier (orange) 
representing ages 65-84. As the chapter discusses, this group is 
growing significantly, shown by the increasing share of the overall graph 
it takes up. Also of note is the group at the very top, which is also 
growing in size. (For comparison, can you even detect the line 
representing 85+ on the left side of the graph, closer to the year 1900?) 
(Credit: US Census Bureau) 

 
 
There is an element of social construction, both local 
and global, in the way individuals and nations define 
who is old; that is, the shared meaning of the concept 
of old is created through interactions among people in 
society. As Table 5.1 demonstrates, different 
generations have varying perspectives on aging. 
Researchers asked questions about the ages at which 
people reach certain milestones or new categories in 
life. Members of the Baby Boom generation indicate 
that a person is officially "old" when they turn 73 years 
old. Millennials, a much younger group, felt that people 
became old when they turned 59. The same survey 
asked questions about the end of youth and the prime 
of life (Emling 2017). Interestingly, Boomers and 
GenXers both felt that youth "ended" by age 31 and 
that the prime of life didn't start until many years later. 
Millennials felt that people reached the prime of life at 
age 36, before youth ended at age 40. It's worth noting 
that at the time of the survey, the Millennials were all 
36 and younger.  
Demographically, the U.S. population has undergone a 
massive shift both in the overall population of older 
adults and their share of the total population. Both are 
significant and impactful on major policy decisions and day-to-day life. In 1900, the population of U.S people over sixty-
five years old was 3 million, representing about 4 percent of the total population. That number increased to 33 million in 
1994 and was roughly 12 percent of the total population (Hobbs 1994). By 2016 that number had already grown to 49 
million, about 15 percent of the total population (U.S. Census Bureau 2018), and the number of adults 65+ and the 
proportion of the population that is in this “old” age group, will continue to increase. Like many other Western European 
and Asian nations, people in the United States are having fewer children, so there are fewer young people in the 
population. At the same time, the largest birth cohorts in United States history are already in the 65+ age group (e.g., 
Baby Boomers) or will reach these ages in the next few decades (i.e., Gen Xers, and Millennials). In addition, life 
expectancy increase substantially since the Baby Boomers entered the world population. Even though life expectancy 
has mostly leveled off, and even decreased during the first few years of the COVID-19 pandemic, many middle-aged 
people today will live well into their 80s and 90s. These older age groups continue to be the fastest growing age 
demographic in the United States due to these demographic patterns. 
It is important to note, however, that not all people age equally. Worldwide, in countries in which childbirth is safe and 
women have the care they need; women significantly outlive men. Although all the reasons for these significant and 
persisting gender differences in life expectancy are not fully understood, scholars generally conclude that there are both 
biological and social components. Figure 5.6 shows the number of men relative to every 100 women by age group. This 
figure, which is based on data collected in 2010, there were ninety sixty-five-year-old men per one hundred sixty-five-
 
 
Boomer response 
Gen X response 
Millennial response 
At what age does youth end? 
At what age is the prime of life? 
At what age is someone old? 
 
Table 5.1: A survey conducted by the U.S. Trust gathered opinion data on the aging milestones and categories. 
Boomers, Gen X people, and Millennials had generally different views. 
 
Figure 5.5   Older adults are an important political 
constituency, and they may use their age to their 
advantage. Originating in Canada in the late 1980s, 
groups of Raging Grannies have protested nuclear 
weapons, the Iraq War, pesticides, genetically modified 
foods, and racial injustice. (Credit: Brave New Films/flickr) 

 
 
year-old women. However, there were only eighty seventy-five-year-old men per one hundred seventy-five-year-old 
women, and only sixty eighty-five- year-old men per one hundred eighty-five-year-old women. Although these differences 
may change over time as researchers identify factors that reduce male life expectancy, there remain important social 
implications for these differences, including that women more commonly partner with men who are the same age or 
older, leading women to be much more likely to find themselves caring for a sick spouse and experiencing widowhood 
in later life. Given that women have lower rates of wealth in the United States relative to their spouses, women who are 
widowed have higher rates of poverty.  
Baby Boomers 
Of particular interest to gerontologists today is the 
population of Baby Boomers, the cohort born between 
1946 and 1964 and now all over the age of 60. 
Coming of age in the 1960s and early 1970s, the baby 
boom generation was the first group of children and 
teenagers with their own spending power and therefore 
their own marketing power (Macunovich 2000). As this 
group has aged, it has redefined what it means to be 
young, middle-aged, and now old. People in the 
Boomer generation do not want to grow old the way 
their grandparents did and their spending power has 
transformed a variety of consumer industries. Boomers 
have inspired the development of a wide range of new 
products from those seeking to help them avoid aging 
as long as possible (e.g., “anti-aging” products) to 
products that help them avoid living in a nursing home 
as long as possible.  
Figure 5.7 shows a comparison of the U.S. population 
by age and gender in a figure called a population pyramid. The bars provide the number of males on the left side by age 
group and the number of females on the right side by age group with two bars that are overlapping to show differences 
in the distribution of the population by age between 2000 and 2010. The biggest bulge in the pyramid (representing the 
largest population group) is moving up the pyramid over time. In 2000, the largest population group was age thirty-five 
to fifty-five. In 2010, that group was age forty-five to sixty-five, meaning the oldest baby Boomers were just reaching the 
age at which the U.S. Census considers them old. In 2030, the youngest Baby Boomers reach age 65 and collectively, 
this group will make up most older adults alive. 
This aging of the Baby Boom cohort has serious implications for our society. Healthcare is one of the areas most 
impacted by this trend. According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, healthcare spending is 
projected to grow at least 5.5 percent each year (depending on healthcare policies and other factors). The portion of 
government spending on Medicare (a program in which the government covers some costs of healthcare for older 
adults) is expected to be (at least, depending on healthcare policy changes over time) 15 percent of our total gross 
domestic product (GDP) by 2080 (CMS 2018).  
Unlike older adults of previous generations, Boomers have been much less likely to abandon work or leisure activities 
based on chronological age. They have also been more dedicated to engaging in health behaviors to help preserve 
health and function and leverage more medical support to keep living vigorous lives. In addition, they continue to play 
an important role in benefiting society in later life. Boomers work for pay (with a large proportion relative to other groups 
starting and/or running their own businesses), volunteer in their communities, provide important care to members of 
their family, and drive the economy through spending. The many contributions that older adults provide is sometimes 
referred to as the “longevity economy” – or the economic benefits that society is accruing because there are more older 
adults in society.  
 
Figure 5.6   This U.S. Census graph shows the number of 
males per 100 females. However, over the past two decades, 
men have narrowed the percentage by which women outlive 
them. (Credit: the U.S. Census Bureau) 

 
 
The economic impact of aging Boomers is also an area of 
concern, however. Although the baby boom generation earned 
more than previous generations and enjoyed a higher standard 
of living, they do not have sufficient personal savings to afford a 
lengthy period of retirement. According to most retirement and 
investment experts, to maintain their accustomed lifestyle, 
people need to save at least ten times their annual income 
before retiring. (Note: That's income, not salary.) So, if a person 
has an income of $60,000 per year, they should have saved 
$600,000. If they made $100,000 per year, they should have 
saved $1 million. But most Baby Boomers have only saved an 
estimated $144,000, and only 40 percent have saved more than 
$250,000 (Gravier 2021). The causes of these shortfalls are 
varied but are especially linked with the replacement of defined 
benefit pension programs in the United States with optional 
defined contribution retirement programs, with many Boomers 
not having retirement savings programs set up as a standard 
process of employment. In addition, many boomers were nearing 
retirement at the start of the 2008 “Great Recession.” Further, 
higher education costs have increased significantly when many 
Baby Boomers were sending their children to college. The end 
result for Boomers is that they report a great deal of stress about 
running out of money, and many are relying only on Social Security income, which is designed to cover approximately 
1/3 of living expenses in retirement.  
Social Security is a government-run retirement program funded primarily through payroll taxes. With enough people 
paying into the program, there should be enough money for retirees to take out. But with the aging Boomer cohort 
starting to receive Social Security benefits and fewer workers paying into the Social Security trust fund, economists 
estimate that Social Security is facing significant problems related to long-term solvency. For generations following the 
Baby Boomers (and likely the youngest of the Boomers), unless a higher proportion of total income is assessed to pay 
into the Social Security system among wealthier Americans, future generations are only expected to receive about 75% 
of the Social Security income they are entitled.  
Aging around the World 
The United States is certainly not alone regarding its aging population; in fact, it doesn’t even have the fastest- growing 
group of older adults. In 2019, the world had 703 million people aged 65 years or over. By 2050, that number is 
projected to double to 1.5 billion. One in six people in the world will be 65 or over (United Nations 2020). 
 
Figure 5.7   Population by Age and Sex: 2000 and 
2010. In this U.S. Census pyramid chart, the baby 
boom bulge was aged thirty-five to fifty-five in 
2000. In 2020, they were aged fifty-five to 
seventy-five. (Credit: the U.S. Census Bureau) 

 
 
This percentage is expected to increase, which may disproportionately burden countries with the highest proportions, 
particularly if people continue to retire in their 60s. One country that will soon face a serious aging crisis is China, which 
is on the cusp of an “aging boom”— a period when its old 
population will dramatically increase. China’s “one-child 
policy” in which people between 1980 and 2015 were 
allowed only to have one child per family, led to a whole 
generation of young people who have many more older 
adults than young adults coming into the population, 
leading to a much higher proportion of older people. This 
has created many policy-related challenges for China (Xiang 
et al, 2025). The number of people above age sixty in China 
today is about 310 million, making up over 20% of the total 
population, with a shortage of adults available to provide 
care for them. By 2050, nearly a third of the Chinese 
population will be age sixty or older, which will put a 
significant burden on typical working age populations and 
impact China’s economic growth (Bannister, Bloom, and 
Rosenberg 2010).  
If life expectancy increases across the world, care for older 
adults will be an increasingly pressing issue. Wienclaw (2009) suggests that with fewer working-age citizens available to 
provide home care and long-term assisted care to older adults, the costs of care will increase. Worldwide, the 
expectation governing the amount and type of elder care varies from culture to culture. For example, in Asia the 
responsibility for elder care lies firmly on the family, in part because they don’t have private pensions (Yap, Thang, and 
Traphagan 2005). This is different from the approach in many Western countries, where older adults are expected to 
tend to their own care. It is not uncommon for family members to intervene if older adults require assistance. Even then, 
caring for older adults is considered voluntary.  
 In China, several studies have noted the attitude of filial piety (deference and respect to one’s parents and ancestors in 
all things) as defining all other virtues (Hsu 1971; Hamilton 1990). Cultural attitudes in Japan prior to approximately 
1986 supported the idea that older adults deserve assistance (Ogawa and Retherford 1993). However, seismic shifts in 
major social institutions (like family and economy) have created an increased demand for community and government 
care. For example, the increase in women working outside the home has made it more difficult to provide in- home care 
to aging parents, and greater need for government-supported institutions (Raikhola and Kuroki 2009). In the United 
States, by contrast, many people view caring for older adults as a burden. Even when there is a family member able and 
willing to provide for an old family member, 60 percent of family caregivers are employed outside the home and are 
unable to provide the needed support. At the same time, however, many middle-class families are unable to bear the 
financial burden of “outsourcing” professional healthcare, resulting in gaps in care (Bookman and Kimbrel 2011).  
 
Figure 5.8   Cultural values and attitudes can shape 
people’s experience of aging. (Credit: Tom 
Coppen/flickr) 

 
 
5.2   The Process of Aging 
As human beings grow older, they go through different 
phases or stages of life. It is helpful to understand aging in 
the context of these phases. A life course is the period from 
birth to death, including a sequence of predictable life 
events such as physical maturation. Each phase comes with 
different responsibilities and expectations, which of course 
vary by individual and culture. Children love to play and 
learn, looking forward to becoming preteens. As preteens 
begin to test their independence, they are eager to become 
teenagers. 
Teenagers anticipate the promises and challenges of 
adulthood. Adults become focused on creating families, 
building careers, and experiencing the world as 
independent people. Finally, many adults look forward to 
old age as a wonderful time to enjoy life without as much 
pressure from work and family life. In old age, 
grandparenthood can provide many of the joys of 
parenthood without all the hard work that parenthood 
entails. And as work responsibilities abate, old age may be 
a time to explore hobbies and activities that there was no time for earlier in life. Some people, however, fear old age 
and do anything to “avoid” it by seeking medical and cosmetic fixes for the natural effects of age. These differing views 
on the life course are the result of the cultural values and norms into which people are socialized. 
Through the phases of the life course, dependence and independence levels change. At birth, newborns are dependent 
on caregivers for everything. As babies become toddlers and toddlers become adolescents and then teenagers, they 
assert their independence more and more. Gradually, children come to be considered adults, responsible for their own 
lives, although the point at which this occurs is widely varied among individuals, families, and cultures. 
Aging is a lifelong process with maturation and change on physical, psychological, and social levels (Riley, 1978). Age, 
much like race, class, and gender, is a hierarchy in which some categories are more highly valued than others. For 
example, while many children look forward to gaining independence, Packer and Chasteen (2006) suggest that even in 
 
Figure 5.9   Aging can be a visible, public experience. 
Canes, scooters, and other necessities are recognized 
signs of aging. Because of the meanings that culture 
assigns to these changes, people believe that being 
older means being in physical decline. Many older 
people, however, remain healthy, active, and happy. 
(Credit: Phil Dolby/flickr) 

 
 
children, age prejudice leads to a negative 
view of aging. This, in turn, can lead to a 
widespread segregation between the old 
and the young at the institutional, societal, 
and cultural levels (Hagestad and 
Uhlenberg 2006). 
Biological Changes  
Each person experiences age-related 
changes based on many factors. Biological 
factors, such as molecular and cellular 
changes are influenced by processes that 
are genetic or uncontrollable, and others 
are based on lifestyle factors like amount 
of physical exercise or diet (Whitbourne 
and Whitbourne 2010). Physical changes 
like the emergence of wrinkles, the skin 
becoming thinner, hair turning gray and 
hair loss becoming more significant over 
time, changes in the shape of the eye so 
reading words becomes more difficult are 
all typical aspects of normal aging that 
cannot be stopped or changed by interventions (aside from hair dye); however, there are some variations in the timing of 
these changes. A culture that values youthfulness and beauty above all else leads to a negative perception of these 
changes.  Conversely, a culture that reveres older adults for their life experience and wisdom may view these 
characteristics as ones indicating greater wisdom.   
The effects of aging can feel daunting, and sometimes the fear of physical changes (like declining energy, food 
sensitivity, and loss of hearing and vision) is more challenging to deal with than the changes themselves. Overall, 
people’s experiences of physical aspects of aging are more positive than they expect. In fact, in 2022 only about 30% of 
adults 65+ in the United States rated their health as fair or poor, and about 40% rated their health as very good or 
excellent, based on data drawn from a nationally representative longitudinal study called the Health and Retirement 
Study.  
Another key issue regarding biological aging is the fact that growing evidence that even though there are well 
documented health changes that are associated with aging, they are not determined by age. In fact, even though 
muscle and bone mass declines with age on average, there is growing evidence that people who maintain (or even start 
for the first time!) resistance training in later life, they can maintain or even increase muscle and bone mass even into 
the 70s and beyond. Risks of disability in later life are more significant for certain groups, including and especially 
women, and women have historically not been encouraged to maintain higher levels of muscle mass across the life 
span. Changes in norms with women being more likely to maintain resistance training across adulthood could 
significantly change current trends in health and functioning as people age.  
Biological aging is also influenced by social and environmental factors. Exposure to stressors such as poverty, racism, 
and even certain occupational exposures, early life traumas, can change the speed of physiological aging (Polsky et al, 
2022). Sociologists who study aging and health have identified important factors that contributed to accelerated aging 
as a result of stressful life exposures including changes to immune functioning, increased levels of inflammation, 
accelerated cellular aging and oxidative stress. For instance, childhood poverty has been shown to modify people’s 
biological systems in ways that lead to earlier onset of disability, and shorter life expectancy (Schmidt, et al, 2025).  
 
Figure 5.10   Aging is accompanied by a host of biological, social, and 
psychological changes. Depending on their health, older people can 
engage in the same activities they always have, or even try new ones. 
(Credit: Forest Service Alaska Region/flickr) 

 
 
Social and Psychological Changes 
Male or female, growing older means confronting the psychological issues that come with entering the last phase of life. 
Young people moving into adulthood take on new roles and responsibilities as their lives expand, but an opposite arc 
can be observed in old age. What are the hallmarks of social and psychological change? 
Retirement—the withdrawal from paid work at a certain age—is a relatively recent idea. Up until the late nineteenth 
century, people worked about sixty hours a week until they were physically incapable of continuing. Following the 
American Civil War, veterans receiving pensions were able to withdraw from the workforce, and the number of working 
older men began declining. A second large decline in the number of working men began in the post-World War II era, 
probably due to the availability of Social Security, and a third large decline in the 1960s and 1970s was probably due to 
the social support offered by Medicare and the increase in Social Security benefits (Munnell 2011). 
In the twenty-first century, most people hope that at some point they will be able to stop working and enjoy the fruits of 
their labor. But do we look forward to this time or fear it? When people retire from familiar work routines, some easily 
seek new hobbies, interests, and forms of recreation. Many find new groups and explore new activities, but others may 
find it more difficult to adapt to new routines and loss of social roles, losing their sense of self-worth in the process. 
Each phase of life has challenges that come with the potential for fear. Erik H. Erikson (1902–1994), in his view of 
socialization, broke the typical lifespan into eight phases. Each phase presents a particular challenge that must be 
overcome. In the final stage, old age, the challenge is to embrace integrity over despair. Some people are unable to 
successfully overcome the challenge. They may have to confront regrets, such as being disappointed in their children’s 
lives or perhaps their own. They may have to accept that they will never reach certain career goals. Or they must come 
to terms with what their career success has cost them, such as time with their family or declining personal health. 
Others, however, are able to achieve a strong sense of integrity and are able to embrace the new phase in life. When 
that happens, there is tremendous potential for creativity. They can learn new skills, practice new activities, and 
peacefully prepare for the end of life. 
For some, overcoming despair might entail remarriage after the death of a spouse. A study conducted by Kate Davidson 
(2002) reviewed demographic data that asserted men were more likely to remarry after the death of a spouse and 
suggested that widows (the surviving female spouse of a deceased male partner) and widowers (the surviving male 
spouse of a deceased female partner) experience their postmarital lives differently. Many surviving women enjoyed a 
new sense of freedom, since they were living alone for the first time. On the other hand, for surviving men, there was a 
greater sense of having lost something, because they were now deprived of a constant source of care as well as the 
focus of their emotional life. A growing trend, too, is that many older adults are choosing cohabitation or remaining in a 
committed relationship but continuing to live separately from their romantic partner (i.e., “living apart together” or a LAT 
couple) rather than remarriage (Brown et al, 2022).  
Aging and Sexuality 
Although it is sometimes difficult to have an open, public national dialogue about aging and sexuality, the reality is that 
our sexual selves do not disappear after age sixty-five. People continue to enjoy sex—and not always safe sex—well into 
their later years. In some ways, old age may be a time to enjoy sex more, not less. For women, the later years can bring 
a sense of relief as the fear of an unwanted pregnancy is removed and the children are grown and taking care of 
themselves. However, while we have expanded the number of psycho-pharmaceuticals to address sexual dysfunction in 
men, it was not until recently that the medical field acknowledged the existence of female sexual dysfunctions (Bryant 
2004). Additional treatments have been developed or applied to address sexual desire or dysfunction, which sometimes 
leads members of both sexes to believe that problems are easily resolved. But emotional and social factors play an 
important role, and medications on their own cannot resolve all issues (Nonacs 2018). 
Aging and sexuality also is related to relationships between people of different ages, referred to as age-gap 
relationships by researchers. These types of relationships are certainly not confined to older adults, but people often 

 
 
make assumptions about older adults in 
romantic relationships with younger people 
(and vice versa). Research into age-gap 
relationships indicates that social pressure 
can have impacts on relationship 
commitment or lead to break ups. The life 
stages of the people can also have impacts, 
especially if one of them is old and the 
other is not (Karantzas 2018). A 
relationship between a 30-year-old and a 
45-year-old most likely involves fewer 
discussions about serious health issues and 
retirement decisions than one between a 
55-year-old and a 70-year-old. Both have 
15-year age gaps, but the circumstances 
are quite different. 
Death and Dying 
For most of human history, the standard of 
living was significantly lower than it is now. Humans struggled to survive with few amenities and very limited medical 
technology. The risk of death due to disease or accident was high in any life stage, and life expectancy was low. As 
people began to live longer, death became associated with old age. 
For many teenagers and young adults, losing a grandparent or another older relative can be the first loss of a loved one 
they experience. It may be their first encounter with grief, a psychological, emotional, and social response to the feelings 
of loss that accompanies death or a similar event.  
People tend to perceive death, their own and that of others, based on the values of their culture. While some may look 
upon death as the natural conclusion to a long, fruitful life, others may find the prospect of dying frightening to 
contemplate. People tend to have strong resistance to the idea of their own death, and strong emotional reactions of 
loss to the death of loved ones. Viewing death as a loss, as opposed to a natural or tranquil transition, is often 
considered normal in the United States. 
What may be surprising is how few studies were conducted on death and dying prior to the 1960s. Death and dying 
were fields that had received little attention until a psychologist named Elisabeth Kübler-Ross began observing people 
who were in the process of dying. As Kübler-Ross witnessed 
people’s transition toward death, she found some common 
threads in their experiences. She observed that the process had 
five distinct stages: denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and 
acceptance. She published her findings in a 1969 book called 
On Death and Dying. The book remains a classic on the topic 
today although empirical assessments show that there is great 
variation in whether and in what order one proceeds through 
the five stages (Corr, 2018).  
Kübler-Ross wrote that a person’s first reaction to the prospect 
of dying is denial: this is characterized by the person's not 
wanting to believe he or she is dying, with common thoughts 
such as “I feel fine” or “This is not really happening to me.” The 
second stage is anger, when loss of life is seen as unfair and 
unjust. A person then resorts to the third stage, bargaining: 
trying to negotiate with a higher power to postpone the 
 
Figure 5.11   In Harold and Maude, a 1971 cult classic movie, a 
twenty-something young man falls in love with a seventy-nine-year-old 
woman. The world disapproves. (Credit: luckyjackson/flickr) 
 
Figure 5.12   A young man sits at the grave of his 
great-grandmother. (Credit: Sara Goldsmith/flickr) 

 
 
inevitable by reforming or changing the way he or she lives. The fourth stage, psychological depression, allows for 
resignation as the situation begins to seem hopeless. In the final stage, a person adjusts to the idea of death and 
reaches acceptance. At this point, the person can face death honestly, by regarding it as a natural and inevitable part of 
life and can make the most of their remaining time.  
The work of Kübler-Ross was eye-opening when it was introduced. It broke new ground and opened the doors for 
sociologists, social workers, health practitioners, and therapists to study death and help those who were facing death. 
Kübler-Ross’s work is generally considered a major contribution to thanatology: the systematic study of death and dying. 
Of special interests to thanatologists is the concept of “dying with dignity.” Modern medicine includes advanced medical 
technology that may prolong life without a parallel improvement to the quality of life one may have. In some cases, 
people may not want to continue living when they are in constant pain and no longer enjoying life. Should patients have 
the right to choose to die with dignity? In the United States, Oregon was the first state to pass a law allowing medical aid 
in dying (MAID). In 1997, Oregon instituted the Death with Dignity Act, which required the presence of two physicians for 
a legal assisted suicide. This law was successfully challenged by U.S. Attorney General John Ashcroft in 2001, but the 
appeals process ultimately upheld the Oregon law. As of 2025, 11 states and the District of Columbia have passed 
similar laws allowing medical aid in dying (Khaja, 2025). 
The controversy surrounding death with dignity laws is emblematic of the way our society tries to separate itself from 
death. Health institutions have built facilities to comfortably house those who are terminally ill. This is seen as a 
compassionate act, helping relieve the surviving family members of the burden of caring for the dying relative. But 
studies almost universally show that people prefer to die in their own homes (Lloyd, White, and Sutton 2011). Is it our 
social responsibility to care for old relatives up until their death? How do we balance the responsibility for caring for an 
old relative with our other responsibilities and obligations? As our society grows older, and as new medical technology 
can prolong life even further, the answers to these questions will develop and change. 
The changing concept of hospice is an indicator of our society’s changing view of death. Hospice is a type of healthcare 
that treats terminally ill people (typically defined as those with fewer than six months to live) when “cure-oriented 
treatments” are no longer an option (Hospice Foundation of America 2012b). Hospice doctors, nurses, and therapists 
receive special training in the care of the dying. The focus is not on getting better or curing the illness, but on passing 
out of this life in comfort and peace. Hospice centers exist as a place where people can go to die in comfort, and 
increasingly, hospice services encourage at-home care so that someone has the comfort of dying in a familiar 
environment, surrounded by family (Hospice Foundation of America 2012a). While many of us would probably prefer to 
avoid thinking of the end of our lives, it may be possible to take comfort in the idea that when we do approach death in 
a hospice setting, it is in a familiar, relatively controlled place. 
5.3   Challenges Facing Older Adults 
Aging comes with many challenges. The loss of independence is one potential part of the process, as are diminished 
physical ability and age discrimination. The term senescence refers to the aging process, including biological, emotional, 
intellectual, social, and spiritual changes. This section discusses some of the challenges we encounter during this 
process. 
As already observed, many older adults remain highly self-sufficient. Others require more care. Because older adults 
typically no longer hold jobs, finances can be a challenge. And due to cultural misconceptions, older people can be 
targets of ridicule and stereotypes. Older adults face many challenges in later life, but they do not have to enter old age 
without dignity. 
Poverty 
For many people in the United States, growing older once meant living with less income. In 1960, almost 35 percent of 
older adults existed on poverty-level incomes. A generation ago, the nation’s oldest populations had the highest risk of 
living in poverty. At the start of the twenty-first century, the older population was putting an end to that trend. Among 
people over sixty-five years old, the poverty rate fell from 30 percent in 1967 to 9.7 percent in 2008, well below the 

 
 
national average of 13.2 percent (U.S. Census Bureau 2009). However, given the subsequent recession, which severely 
reduced the retirement savings of many while taxing public support systems, how are older adults affected? According 
to the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, the national poverty rate among older adults had risen to 14 
percent by 2010 (Urban Institute and Kaiser 
Commission 2010). Moreover, this simple 
snapshot conceals vast subgroup 
differences; for instance, Black and 
Hispanic unmarried older women are nearly 
ten times as likely as married white older 
men to live in poverty (Thornton & Bowers, 
2024). 
Before the recession hit, what had changed 
to cause a reduction in poverty among older 
adults? What social patterns contributed to 
the shift? The most important contribution 
was the introduction of new social policies 
that increased opportunities for financial 
security in later life. Introduction of the 
Social Security Administration and the 
establishment of Medicare and Medicaid 
healthcare programs institutionalized basic 
income in later life and helped ensure that older people could maintain health insurance during the years in which 
healthcare costs are highest. In addition, as a growing proportion of women joined the workforce, women had the ability 
to maintain financial independence in later life. More married couples earned double incomes during their working 
years and saved more money for their retirement. Private employers and governments began offering better retirement 
programs. New trends over the last four decades encourage people to live healthier lifestyles, including greater 
emphasis and evidence showing the benefits of regular exercise and certain nutrition habits, such as regular 
consumption of fruits and vegetables. There has also been greater access to information about the health risks of 
behaviors such as cigarette smoking, alcohol consumption, and drug use. Overall, maintaining high levels of health 
function as people age at each stage of life reduces the risks of 
poverty in old age by reducing the risk of needing care and 
expensive healthcare costs.   
Ageism  
Driving to the grocery store, Peter, twenty-three years old, got 
stuck behind a car on a four-lane main artery through his city’s 
business district. The speed limit was thirty-five miles per hour, 
and while most drivers sped along at forty to forty-five miles per 
hour, the driver in front of him was going the minimum speed. 
Peter tapped on his horn. He tailgated the driver. Finally, Peter 
had a chance to pass the car. He glanced over. Sure enough, 
Peter thought, a gray-haired old man guilty of “DWO,” driving 
while old.  
At the grocery store, Peter waited in the checkout line behind an 
older woman. She paid for her groceries, lifted her bags of food 
into her cart, and toddled toward the exit. Peter, guessing her to 
be about eighty years old, was reminded of his grandmother. He 
paid for his groceries and caught up with her. 
 
Figure 5.13   While poverty rates among older adults showed an 
improvement trend for decades, the 2008 recession has changed 
some older people’s financial futures. Some who had planned a 
leisurely retirement have found themselves at risk of late-age 
destitution. (Credit: (left) Michael Cohen/flickr; Photo (right) Alex 
Proimos/flickr) 
 
Figure 5.14   Are these street signs humorous or 
offensive? What shared assumptions make them 
humorous? Or is memory loss too serious to be 
made fun of? (Credit: Tumbleweed/flickr) 

 
 
“Can I help you with your cart?” he asked. 
“No, thank you. I can get it myself,” she said and marched off toward her car. 
Peter’s responses to both older people, the driver and the shopper, were assessments of the capacity of the individuals 
he encountered based on his perceptions of their age. He assumed the driver drove cautiously because the man looked 
old, and he assumed the shopper needed help carrying her groceries because she was an older woman. Although the 
older man may have had reduced cognitive abilities that caused him to be more cautious while driving, and the older 
women could have had reduced muscle mass that reduced her ability to handle the weight of her groceries, Peter is 
unable to determine these things using observations alone.  
Ageism is defined as a form of discrimination (i.e., an action based on a prejudice) that is associated with negative 
assumptions associated with chronological age. This term was originally coined by Dr. Robert Butler in 1968. At the 
time, Butler argued that ageism was common and could be observed in nearly all cultures (Brownell). Ageist attitudes 
and biases based on stereotypes reduce older adults to inferior or limited positions. Negative assumptions make people 
more likely to see older people as a social “other,” and a member of a different social group that has less social value. 
In addition, people who hold negative perceptions of older adults or aging may experience consequences of these views 
as they get older themselves. When people who have strong negative assumptions about aging experience a decline in 
physical health or function as they get older, they are less likely to get help or treatments because they assume health 
decline is a normal part of aging (Levy et al, 2020). This is important because with health maintenance across the life 
course, people maintain very high levels of physical, psychological, and cognitive function into late life. 
Ageism can vary in severity. Peter’s attitudes are probably seen as fairly mild, but relating to older adults in ways that 
assume lower levels of ability or function can prevent people from having access to certain opportunities. For instance, if 
ageism in the workplace may occur if people assume older workers have less capacity to learn and do not offer them 
training opportunities to advance their skills. It could also appear in the hiring process, with people selected for a job 
based on their chronological age. Or, it could appear through rationing of healthcare services. 
In healthcare, the effects of discrimination can have more severe consequences. Doctors could avoid pursuing certain 
tests because they assume that a problem is based on normal aging rather than an underlying issue that could offer 
significant improvement in daily function and quality of life. In an assisted living setting, a healthcare provider could 
limit an older adults’ freedom to make decisions about their daily activities based on their own values without 
consulting the older person about their personal goals or interests.  
In early societies, older adults were responsible for leadership in their communities. Many preindustrial societies 
observed gerontocracy, a type of social structure wherein the power is held by a society’s oldest members. In some 
countries today, older adults still have influence and power, and their vast knowledge is respected. However, the roles 
older adults play in society varies significantly by culture, with older adults in many societies today viewed as a social 
burden. In many modern nations, industrialization contributed to the diminished social standing of older adults. Wealth, 
power, and prestige are now held by people in a variety of age brackets. 
In agrarian societies, married couples typically cared for their aging parents. It was common for the oldest members of 
the family to contribute to the household by doing chores, cooking, and helping with childcare. As economies shifted 
from agrarian to industrial, younger generations moved to cities to work in factories. The trend toward older people 
living apart from their grown children is now commonplace.  
Mistreatment and Abuse 
Mistreatment and abuse of older adults is a major social problem. As expected, with the biology of aging, older adults 
sometimes become physically frail. This frailty renders them dependent on others for care—sometimes for small needs 
like household tasks, and sometimes for assistance with basic functions like eating and toileting. Unlike a child, who 
also is dependent on another for care, an elder is an adult with a lifetime of experience, knowledge, and opinions—a 
more fully developed person. This makes the care-providing situation more complex. 

 
 
Elder abuse occurs when a caretaker intentionally deprives an older person of care or harms the person in his or her 
charge. Caregivers may be family members, relatives, friends, health professionals, or employees of senior housing or 
nursing care. Older adults may be subject to many different types of abuse. 
Five major categories of elder abuse are commonly identified: 1) physical abuse, such as hitting or shaking, 2) sexual 
abuse, including rape and coerced nudity, 3) psychological or emotional abuse, such as verbal harassment or 
humiliation, 4) neglect or failure to provide adequate care, and 5) financial abuse or exploitation (Acierno 2010). 
However, the National Center on Elder Abuse (NCEA) also identifies abandonment and self-neglect as types of abuse. 
Table 5.2 shows some of the signs and symptoms that the NCEA encourages people to notice. 
How prevalent is elder abuse? Two recent U.S. studies found that roughly one in ten older adults surveyed had suffered 
at least one form of elder abuse. Some social researchers believe elder abuse is underreported and that the number 
may be higher. The risk of abuse also increases in people with health issues such as dementia (Kohn and Verhoek-
Oftedahl 2011). Older women were found to be victims of verbal abuse more often than their male counterparts. 
In Acierno’s study, which included a sample of 5,777 respondents aged sixty and older, 5.2 percent of respondents 
reported financial abuse, 5.1 percent said they’d been neglected, and 4.6 endured emotional abuse (Acierno 2010). The 
prevalence of physical and sexual abuse was lower at 1.6 and 0.6 percent, respectively (Acierno 2010). 
Other studies have focused on the caregivers to older adults in an attempt to discover the causes of elder fraud and 
elder abuse (Blomberg & Brancale, 2025). Regarding elder fraud, a growing number of strategies are being used to 
scam older adults, with Artificial Intelligence tools making it increasingly easy to trick people of all ages into situations 
that lead to financial fraud. Scammers rely on older adults who have reduced cognitive functioning, and many older 
adults are unwilling to report experiences of fraud because they are embarrassed or worried that family members will 
think that they are no longer able to live independently.  To help with this, organizations like AARP have created 
helplines to support older adults who face these issues and help bring attention to resources that can reduce these 
issues. 
Researchers studying elder abuse have focused on those most likely to perpetuate these crimes – caregivers. 
Caregivers are more likely to perpetrating abuse against those in their care when they lack experience with providing 
care, they are facing other demands such as jobs (for those who weren’t professionally employed as caregivers), they 
are also caring for children, they are living full-time with the older people they are caring for, and if they are experiencing 
high stress, isolation, lack of support, and or have a history of depression (Kohn and Verhoek-Oftedahl 2011). Many of 
the caregivers who physically abuse elders have a personal history with abuse, often when they were children. Family 
members with some sort of dependency on the older adult in their care are also more likely to physically abuse that 
person. For example, an adult child who is caring for an old parent while at the same time depending on some form of 
income from that parent, is more likely to perpetrate abuse (Kohn and Verhoek-Oftedahl 2011). 
 
Type of Abuse 
Signs and Symptoms 
Physical abuse 
Bruises, untreated wounds, sprains, broken glasses, lab findings of medication 
overdose 
Sexual abuse 
Bruises around breasts or genitals, torn or bloody underclothing, unexplained 
venereal disease 
Emotional/psychological abuse 
Being upset or withdrawn, unusual dementia-like behavior (rocking, sucking) 
Neglect 
Poor hygiene, untreated bed sores, dehydration, soiled bedding 
Financial 
Sudden changes in banking practices, inclusion of additional names on bank cards, 
abrupt changes to will 
Self-neglect 
Untreated medical conditions, unclean living area, lack of medical items like 
dentures or glasses 
 
Table 5.2: Signs of Elder Abuse- The National Center on Elder Abuse encourages people to watch for these signs 
of mistreatment. (Credit: National Center on Elder Abuse) 

 
 
5.4   Theoretical Perspectives on Aging 
Functionalism 
Functionalists analyze how the parts of society work together. Functionalists gauge how society’s parts are working 
together to keep society running smoothly. How does this perspective address aging? Older adults, as a group, are one 
of society’s vital parts. Functionalists find that people with better resources who stay active in other roles adjust better 
to old age (Crosnoe and Elder 2002). Three social theories within the functional perspective were developed to explain 
how older people might deal with later-life experiences. 
The earliest gerontological theory in the functionalist perspective 
is disengagement theory, which suggests that withdrawing from 
society and social relationships is a natural part of growing old. 
The suggestion that old age was a distinct state in the life course, 
characterized by a distinct change in roles and activities, was 
groundbreaking when it was first introduced. Disengagement 
theory (Cummings and Henry 1961), however, has been widely 
discredited. The argument that older people withdraw from society 
was based on observations of older adults during the mid-20th 
century when there were few options for older people to remain 
active and engaged, and the theory cannot be disproven, which 
makes it invalid as a theory.  
Despite the criticisms, disengagement theory inspired scholars to 
consider a variety of aging-related phenomena to understand benefits of staying engaged as people age. Activity theory 
argued that activity levels and social involvement are key to healthy aging outcomes (Havinghurst 1961; Neugarten 
1964; Havinghurst, Neugarten, and Tobin 1968). Critics of this theory point out that access to social opportunities and 
activity are not equally available to all. Moreover, not everyone finds fulfillment in the presence of others or participation 
in activities. Reformulations of this theory suggest that participation in informal activities, such as hobbies, are what 
most affect later life satisfaction (Lemon, Bengtson, and Petersen 1972).  
 
Figure 5.15   Does being old mean disengaging 
from the world? (Credit: Candida 
Performa/Wikimedia Commons) 

 
 
According to continuity theory, older adults make specific choices to maintain consistency in internal (personality 
structure, beliefs) and external (relationships) 
structures, remaining active and involved 
throughout their later years. This is an attempt 
to maintain social equilibrium and stability by 
making future decisions on the basis of already 
developed social roles (Atchley 1971; Atchley 
1989). One criticism of this theory is its 
emphasis on so-called “normal” aging, which 
marginalizes those with chronic diseases such 
as Alzheimer’s Disease. 
Conflict Perspective 
The conflict perspective views society as 
inherently unstable, an institution that 
privileges the powerful wealthy few while 
marginalizing everyone else. According to the 
guiding principle of conflict perspective, social 
groups compete with other groups for power 
and scarce resources. Applied to society’s aging 
population, older adults struggle with other 
groups—for example, younger society 
members—to retain a certain share of resources. At some point, this competition may become conflict. 
For example, some people complain that older adults get more than their fair share of society’s resources. In hard 
economic times, there is great concern about the huge costs of Social Security and Medicare. One of every four tax 
dollars, or about 28 percent, is spent on these two programs. In 1950, the federal government paid $781 million in 
Social Security payments. Now, the payments are about 900 times higher. The medical bills of the nation’s old 
population are rising dramatically. While there is more care available to certain segments of the senior community, it 
must be noted that the financial resources available to older people can vary tremendously by race, social class, and 
gender. 
There are three classic theories of aging within the conflict perspective. Modernization theory (Cowgill and Holmes 
1972) suggests that the primary cause of older adults losing power and influence in society are the parallel forces of 
industrialization and modernization. As societies modernize, the status of older adults decreases, and they are 
increasingly likely to experience social exclusion. Before industrialization, strong social norms bound the younger 
generation to care for the older. Now, as societies industrialize, the nuclear family replaces the extended family. 
Societies become increasingly individualistic, and norms regarding the care of older people change. In an individualistic 
industrial society, caring for an old relative is seen as a voluntary obligation that may be ignored without fear of social 
censure. 
The central reasoning of modernization theory is that as long as the extended family is the standard family, as in 
preindustrial economies, elders will have a place in society and a clearly defined role. As societies modernize, older 
adults, unable to work outside of the home, have less to offer economically and are seen as a burden. This model may 
be applied to both the developed and the developing world, and it suggests that as people age they will be abandoned 
and lose much of their familial support since they become a nonproductive economic burden. 
Another theory in the conflict perspective is age stratification theory (Riley, Johnson, and Foner 1972). Though it may 
seem obvious now, with our awareness of ageism, age stratification theorists were the first to suggest that members of 
society might be stratified by age, just as they are stratified by race, class, and gender. Because age serves as a basis of 
social control, different age groups have varying access to social resources such as political and economic power. Within 
societies, behavioral age norms, including norms about roles and appropriate behavior, dictate what members of age 
 
Figure 5.16   At a public protest, older people make their voices 
heard. In advocating for themselves, they help shape public policy 
and alter the allotment of available resources. (Credit: 
longislandwins/flickr) 

 
 
cohorts may reasonably do. For example, it might be considered deviant for an old woman to wear a bikini because it 
violates norms about the sexuality of older females. These norms are specific to each age strata, developing from 
culturally based ideas about how people should “act their age.” 
Thanks to amendments to the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), which drew attention to some of the ways 
in which our society is stratified based on age, U.S. workers no longer must retire upon reaching a specified age. As first 
passed in 1967, the ADEA provided protection against a broad range of age discrimination and specifically addressed 
termination of employment due to age, age specific layoffs, advertised positions specifying age limits or preferences, 
and denial of healthcare benefits to those over sixty- five years old (U.S. EEOC 2012). 
Age stratification theory has been criticized for its broadness and its inattention to other sources of stratification and 
how these might intersect with age. For example, one might argue that an older white male occupies a more powerful 
role, and is far less limited in his choices, compared to an older white female based on his historical access to political 
and economic power. 
Symbolic Interactionism 
Generally, theories within the symbolic 
interactionist perspective focus on how society 
is created through the day-to-day interaction of 
individuals, as well as the way people perceive 
themselves and others based on cultural 
symbols. This microanalytic perspective 
assumes that if people develop a sense of 
identity through their social interactions, their 
sense of self is dependent on those interactions. 
A woman whose main interactions with society 
make her feel old and unattractive may lose her 
sense of self. But a woman whose interactions 
make her feel valued and important will have a 
stronger sense of self and a happier life. 
Symbolic interactionists stress that the changes 
associated with old age, in and of themselves, 
have no inherent meaning. Nothing in the nature 
of aging creates any particular, defined set of 
attitudes. Rather, attitudes toward older adults 
are rooted in society.  
An early microanalytical theory is Rose’s (1962) subculture of aging theory, which focused on the shared community 
created by older adults when they are excluded (due to age), voluntarily or involuntarily, from participating in other 
groups. This theory suggests that older adults will disengage from society and develop new patterns of interaction with 
peers who share common backgrounds and interests. For example, a group consciousness may develop within such 
groups as AARP around issues specific to older adults like the Medicare and create social and political pressure to fix 
those issues. Whether brought together by social or political interests, or even geographic regions, older adults may find 
a strong sense of community with their new group. 
Another theory about aging that is inspired by the symbolic interaction perspective is a theory introduced by 
psychologists - the selective optimization with compensation theory. Baltes and Baltes (1990) based their theory on the 
idea that successful personal development throughout the life course and subsequent mastery of the challenges 
associated with everyday life are based on the components of selection, optimization, and compensation. Though this 
happens at all stages in the life course, in the field of gerontology, researchers focus attention on balancing the losses 
associated with aging with the gains stemming from the same. Here, aging is a process and not an outcome, and the 
goals (compensation) are specific to the individual. 
 
Figure 5.17   The subculture of aging theory posits that older 
adults create their own communities because they have been 
excluded from other groups. (Credit: Icnacio Palomo 
Duarte/flickr) 

 
 
According to this theory, our energy diminishes as we age, and we select (selection) personal goals to get the most 
(optimize) for the effort we put into activities, in this way making up for (compensation) the loss of a wider range of 
goals and activities. In this theory, the physical decline postulated by disengagement theory may result in more 
dependence, but that is not necessarily negative, as it allows aging individuals to save their energy for the most 
meaningful activities. For example, a professor who values teaching sociology may participate in a phased retirement, 
never entirely giving up teaching, but acknowledging personal physical limitations that allow teaching only one or two 
classes per year. 
More recently, Swedish sociologist Lars Tornstam developed a symbolic interactionist theory called gerotranscendence: 
the idea that as people age, they transcend the limited views of life they held in earlier times. Tornstam believes that 
throughout the aging process, older adults become less self-centered and feel more peaceful and connected to the 
natural world. Wisdom comes to older adults, Tornstam’s theory states, and as older adults tolerate ambiguities and 
seeming contradictions, they let go of conflict and develop softer views of right and wrong (Tornstam 2005). Tornstam 
does not claim that everyone will achieve wisdom in aging. Some older adults might still grow bitter and isolated, feel 
ignored and left out, or become grumpy and judgmental. Symbolic interactionists believe that, just as in other phases of 
life, individuals must struggle to overcome their own failings and turn them into strengths. 
 
Key Terms 
activity theory: a theory which suggests that for individuals to enjoy old age and feel satisfied, they must maintain 
activities and find a replacement for the statuses and associated roles they have left behind as they aged 
age stratification theory: a theory which states that members of society are stratified by age, just as they are stratified 
by race, class, and gender 
ageism: discrimination based on age 
Baby Boomers: people in the United States born between approximately 1946 and 1964 
centenarians: people 100 years old or older 
cohort: a group of people who share a statistical or demographic trait 
continuity theory: a theory which states that older adults make specific choices to maintain consistency in internal 
(personality structure, beliefs) and external structures (relationships), remaining active and involved throughout their 
elder years 
dependency ratio: the number of nonproductive citizens (young, disabled, old) to productive working citizens 
disengagement theory: a theory which suggests that withdrawing from society and social relationships is a natural part 
of growing old 
elder abuse: the act of a caretaker intentionally depriving an older person of care or harming the person in their charge 
exchange theory: a theory which suggests that we experience an increased dependence as we age and must 
increasingly submit to the will of others, because we have fewer ways of compelling others to submit to us 
filial piety: deference and respect to one’s parents and ancestors in all things 
geriatrics: a medical specialty focusing on older adults 
gerontocracy: a type of social structure wherein the power is held by a society’s oldest members 
gerontology: a field of science that seeks to understand the process of aging and the challenges encountered as older 
adults grow older 

 
 
gerotranscendence: the idea that as people age, they transcend limited views of life they held in earlier times 
grief: a psychological, emotional, and social response to the feelings of loss that accompanies death or a similar event 
hospice healthcare that treats terminally ill people by providing comfort during the dying process 
life course: the period from birth to death, including a sequence of predictable life events 
life expectancy: the number of years a newborn is expected to live 
modernization theory: a theory which suggests that the primary cause of older adults losing power and influence in 
society are the parallel forces of industrialization and modernization 
physician-assisted suicide: the voluntary use of lethal medication provided by a medical doctor to end one’s life 
selective optimization with compensation theory: a theory based on the idea that successful personal development 
throughout the life course and subsequent mastery of the challenges associated with everyday life are based on the 
components of selection, optimization, and compensation 
senescence: the aging process, including biological, intellectual, emotional, social, and spiritual changes 
social gerontology: a specialized field of gerontology that examines the social (and sociological) aspects of aging 
subculture of aging theory: a theory that focuses on the shared community created by older adults when they are 
excluded (due to age), voluntarily or involuntarily, from participating in other groups 
supercentenarians: people 110 of age or older 
thanatology: the systematic study of death and dying 
 
References 
Introduction 
Diebel, Matthew. 2014. “Yes, Six People Born in the 19th Century Are Still With Us.” USA Today. Retrieved November 2, 
2014 (http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2014/09/05/six-people-still-alive-who- were-born-in-the-
19th-century/15122367/). 
United States Census Bureau. 2011. “Census Bureau Releases Comprehensive Analysis of Fast-Growing 90-and0Older 
Population.” Newsroom Archive, November 17. Retrieved November 1, 2014 
(https://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/aging_population/cb11-194.html). 
5.1   Who Are older adults? Aging in Society 
Bannister, Judith, David E. Bloom, and Larry Rosenberg. 2010. Population Aging and Economic Growth in China. 
Cambridge, MA: The Program on the Global Demography of Aging. 
Bartram, L., and B. Roe. 2005. “Dependency Ratios: Useful Policy-Making Tools?” Geriatrics & Gerontology International 
5:224–228. 
Bierman, Libby. 2011. “The Baby Boom = The BIG Boom in Healthcare.” Forbes, July 22. Retrieved January 31, 2012 
(http://www.forbes.com/sites/sageworks/2011/07/22/the-baby-boom-the-big-boom-in-healthcare/). 
Bookman, Ann, and Delia Kimbrel. 2011. “Families and Elder Care in the Twenty-First Century.” The Future of Children 
21:117–140. 

 
 
Bostrom, Josh. 2005. “Aging Baby Boomers Will Drive Health-Care Innovation.” Infoworld. Retrieved January 31, 2012 
(http://www.infoworld.com/t/business/aging-baby-Boomers-will-drive-health-care- 
innovation-054). 
Cohn, D'Vera and Passel, Jeffrey S. 2018. “A Record 64 Million Americans Live in Multigenerational Households.” Pew 
Research Center. (https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/04/05/a- record-64-million-americans-live-in-
multigenerational-households/) 
Congressional Budget Office. 2008. “Long-Term Outlook for Medicare, Medicaid and Total Health Care Spending.” 
Retrieved January 31, 2012 (http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/102xx/doc10297/Chapter2.5.1.shtml). 
Emling, Shelley. 2017. (“The Age At Which You Are Officially Old.”) AARP. (https://www.aarp.org/home-family/ friends-
family/info-2017/what-age-are-you-old-fd.html) 
Farrel, Diana, David Court, Eric Beinhocker, John Forsyth, Ezra Greenberg, Suruchi Shukla, Jonathan Ablett, and Geoffrey 
Greene. 2008. Talkin' 'Bout My Generation: The Economic Impact of Aging US Baby Boomers. McKinsey Global 
Institute. Retrieved February 12, 2012 (http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/Research/ 
Americas/Talkin_bout_my_generation). 
Gerontological Society of America. 2008. “Baby Boomer Health Care Crisis Looms.” Science Daily, April 17. 
Retrieved January 31, 2012 (http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2008/04/080417111300.htm). 
Gilleard, Chris, and Paul Higgs. 2007. “The Third Age and the Baby Boomers: Two Approaches to the Social Structuring of 
Later Life.” International Journal of Ageing and Later Life 2(2):13–30. 
Graham, Judith. 2021. “Older Adults Without Family or Friends Lag in Race to Get Vaccines.” KHN. 
(https://khn.org/news/article/older-adults-without-family-or-friends-lag-in-race-to-get-vaccines/) 
Hamilton, Gary. 1990. “Patriarchy, Patrimonialism, and Filial Piety: A Comparison of China and Western Europe.” British 
Journal of Sociology 41:77–104. 
Hashimoto, Akiko. 1996. The Gift of Generations: Japanese and American Perspectives on Aging and the Social 
Contract. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Hobbs, Frank. 1994. “Older adults Population.” Population Profile of the United States. Retrieved January 28, 2012 
(http://www.census.gov/population/www/pop-profile/elderpop.html). 
Hsu, Francis. 1971. “Filial Piety in Japan and China: Borrowing, Variation and Significance.” Journal of Comparative 
Family Studies 2:67–74. 
Lee, Mary. 2009. “Trends in Global Population Growth.” Research Starters Sociology: Academic Topic Overview. 
Retrieved January 28, 2012 from (http://www.ebscohost.com/academic/academic-search- premier). 
Levy, Becca R., Martin D. Slade, Suzanne R. Kunkel, and Stanislav V. Kasl, 2002. “Longevity Increased by Positive Self-
perceptions of Aging.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 83(2):261–270. 
Logan, J.R., R. Ward, and G. Spitze. 1992. “As Old as You Feel: Age Identity in Middle and Later Life.” 
Sociological Forces 71:451–67. 
Macunovich, Diane J. 2000. The Baby Boomers. New York: Barnard College Department of Economics. Mujahid, G. 2006. 
“Population Ageing in East and South-East Asia: Current Situation and Emerging 
Challenges.” Papers in Population Ageing No.1. New York: United Nations Population Fund. Retrieved January 28, 2012 
(http://www.eldis.org/assets/Docs/23355.html). 

 
 
Native News Network. 2011. “Age Distribution: AIAN Compared to Total US.” Retrieved January 22, 2012 
(http://www.nativenewsnetwork.com/native-youth-count.html). 
Ogawa, Naohiro, and Robert Retherford. 1993. “Care of older adults in Japan: Changing Norms and Expectations.” 
Journal of Marriage and the Family 55:585–597. 
Pew Research Center. 2010. “The Return of the Multi-Generational Family Household.” Pew Research Social & 
Demographic Trends; Section I. Retrieved November 1, 2014 (http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2010/03/18/ 
the-return-of-the-multi-generational-family-household/). 
Population Fund. Retrieved January 28, 2012 (http://www.eldis.org/assets/Docs/23355.html). 
Raikhola, Pushkar Singh, and Yasuhiro Kuroki. 2009. “Aging and Old Care Practice in Japan: Main Issues, Policy and 
Program Perspective; What Lessons Can Be Learned from Japanese Experiences?” Dhaulagiri: Journal of 
Sociology & Anthropology 3:41–82. 
Reuteman, Rob. 2010. Will Baby Boomers Bankrupt Social Security? Retrieved January 31, 2012 
(http://www.cnbc.com/id/34941334/Will_Baby_Boomers_Bankrupt_Social_Security). 
Rothbaum, F. 1983. “Aging and Age Stereotypes.” Social Cognition 2:171–84. 
Shaw, Gina. “Hip and Knee Replacements on the Rise.” Web MD. Retrieved February 13, 2012 
(http://arthritis.webmd.com/features/hip-knee-replacements-rise). 
Sweetser, Dorian Apple. 1984. “Love and Work: Intergenerational Household Composition in the U. S. in 1900.” 
Journal of Marriage and the Family 46(2):289–293. 
U.S. Census Bureau. 2013. “State and County Facts: USA Quick Facts.” US Census Bureau. Retrieved November 1, 2014 
(http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/00000.html). 
U.S. Census Bureau. 2011a. “Age and Sex Composition 2010.” 2010 Census Briefs, May. Retrieved February 13, 2012 
(http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-03.pdf). 
U.S. Census Bureau. 2011b. “The Older Population: 2010.” 2010 Census Briefs, November. Retrieved December 13, 
2011 (http://0-www.census.gov.iii-server.ualr.edu/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-09.pdf). 
U.S. Census Bureau. 2011c. “Population.” The 2012 Statistical Abstract. Retrieved January 28, 2012 
(http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/cats/population.html). 
U.S. Census Bureau. 2018. “The Population 65 Years and Older.” (https://www.census.gov/library/ 
visualizations/interactive/population-65-years.html) 
Werner, Carrie. 2011. “The Older Population: 2010.” U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved January 28, 2012 
(http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-09.pdf). 
Wiencaw, Ruth. 2009. “Caring for older adults in America.” Research Starters. Retrieved January 28, 2012 
(http://www.ebscohost.com/academic/academic-search-premier). 
World Health Organization. 2012. “Definition of an Older or Old Person.” Retrieved January 28, 2012 
(http://www.who.int/healthinfo/survey/ageingdefnolder/en/index.html). 
Xuequan, Mu. 2011. “Premier Wen Join Nursing Home Seniors to Celebrate Mid-Autumn Festival.” Retrieved February 
12, 2012 (http://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/china/2011-09/13/c_131134367.htm). 
Yap, Mui Teng, Leng Leng Thang, and John W. Traphagan. 2005. “Introduction: Aging in Asia—Perennial Concerns on 
Support and Caring for the Old.” Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology 20:257–267. 

 
 
Zelenev, Sergei. 2008. “Regional Dimensions of the Ageing Situation.” The United Nations. Retrieved January 28, 2012 
(http://social.un.org/index/Ageing/Resources/PapersandPublications.aspx). 
5.2   The Process of Aging 
Administration on Aging. 2011. “A Profile of Older Americans 2010.” Retrieved January 29, 2012 
(http://www.aoa.gov/AoARoot/Aging_Statistics/Profile/2010/14.aspx). 
AGS. 2021. “Geriatrics Workforce By The Numbers (Updated 2021). American Geriatrics Society. 
(https://www.americangeriatrics.org/geriatrics-profession/about-geriatrics/geriatrics-workforce-numbers) 
Bazzini, D.G., and W.D. Mclntosh. 1997. "The Aging Women in Popular Film: Underrepresented, Unattractive, Unfriendly, 
and Unintelligent." Sex Roles 36:531–43. 
Blomberg, T., & Brancale, J. (2025, October 8). Why scammers target seniors—And what you can do about it. Scientific 
American. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/why-scammers-target-seniors-and-what-you-can-do-
about-it/  
Bryant, Ed. 2004. “Male and Female Sexual Dysfunction.” Voice of the Diabetic 19(1). Retrieved January 29, 2012 
(http://www.nfb.org/nfb/diabetic_sexual_dysfunction.asp?SnID=963479200). 
Brown, S. L., Manning, W. D., & Wu, H. (2022). Relationship Quality in Midlife: A Comparison of Dating, Living Apart 
Together, Cohabitation, and Marriage. Journal of marriage and the family, 84(3), 860–878. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12813 
Clarfield, A. Mark. 1990. “Dr. Ignatz Nascher and the Birth of Geriatrics.” Canadian Medical Association Journal 
143(9):944–945, 948. 
Cole, Thomas R. 1993. The Journey of Life: a Cultural History of Aging in America. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Corr, C. A. (2018). Elisabeth Kübler-Ross and the “Five Stages” Model in a Sampling of Recent American Textbooks. 
OMEGA - Journal of Death and Dying, 82(2), 294-322. https://doi.org/10.1177/0030222818809766 (Original 
work published 2020) 
Crimmins, Eileen. 2004. “Trends in the Health of older adults.” Annual Review of Public Health 25:79–98. 
Davidson, Kate. 2002. “Gender Differences in New Partnership Choices and Constraints for Older Widows and 
Widowers.” Ageing International 27: 43–60. 
Drummond, Murray. 1998. “Sports, Aging Men, and Constructions of Masculinity.” Generations 32:32–35. Erikson, Erik 
H. 1963 [1950]. Childhood and Society. New York: Norton. 
Gravier, Elizabeth. 2021. “Experts say you should have 10 times your income saved to retire by age 67—here’s what to 
do if you aren’t yet there.” CNBC. (https://www.cnbc.com/select/what-to-do-if-you-havent-saved- enough-for-
retirement/) 
Hagestad, Gunhild, and Peter Uhlenberg. 2006. “Should We Be Concerned about Age Segregation?” Research on Aging 
28:638–653. 
Harold and Maude. N.d. Retrieved February 1, 2012 (http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0067185/). 
Hillman, Jennifer. 2011. “A Call for an Integrated Biopsychosocial Model to Address Fundamental Disconnects in an 
Emergent Field: An Introduction to the Special Issue on 'Sexuality and Aging'.” Aging International 36:303–312. 
Hospice Foundation of America. 2012a. “Welcome.” Retrieved February 13, 2012 
(http://register.hospicefoundation.org/welcome). 

 
 
Hospice Foundation of America. 2012b. “What Is Hospice?” Retrieved January 29, 2012 
(http://www.hospicefoundation.org/whatishospice). 
Jenkins D., C. Walker, H. Cohen, and L. Curry. 2010. “A Lesbian Older Adult Managing Identity Disclosure: A Case Study.” 
Journal of Gerontological Social Work 53:402–420. 
Karantzas, Gery. 2018. “Mind the Gap: Does Age Difference in Relationships Matter.” The Conversation. 
(https://theconversation.com/mind-the-gap-does-age-difference-in-relationships-matter-94132) 
Khaja, H. (2025, September 17). Medical aid in dying: Navigating evolving laws, institutional policies, and professional 
ethical guidelines. Clinical Advisor.  
Lindau, Stacy Tessler, M.D., L. Philip Schumm, Edward O. Laumann, Wendy Levinson, Colm A. O'Muircheartaigh, and 
Linda J. Waite. 2007. “A Study of Sexuality and Health among Older Adults in the United States.” New England 
Journal of Medicine 357:762–774. 
Lloyd, Liz, Kate White, and Eileen Sutton. 2011. “Researching the End-of-Life in Old Age: Cultural, Ethical and 
Methodological Issues.” Aging &Society 31:386–407. 
Marshall, B., and S. Katz. 2002. “Forever Functional: Sexual Fitness and the Aging Male Body.” Body and Society 8:43–
70. 
Munch, S. 2004. "Gender-Biased Diagnosing of Women's Medical Complaints: Contributions of Feminist Thought, 1970-
1995." Women & Health 40:101–121. 
Munnell, Alice. 2011. “What Is the Average Retirement Age?” Center for Retirement Research. Retrieved January 29, 
2012 (http://crr.bc.edu/briefs/what_is_the_average_retirement_age.html). 
National Senior Citizens Law Center. 2011. “LGTB Older Adults in Long-Term Care Facilities: Stories from the Field.” 
Retrieved January 30, 2012 (http://www.lgbtlongtermcare.org/). 
Nonacs, Ruta. 2018. “Female Sexual Dysfunction: New Treatments on the Way.” MGH Center for Women's Mental 
Health. (https://womensmentalhealth.org/posts/female-sexual-dysfunction-new-treatments-on-the- way/) 
Packer, Dominic and Alison Chasteen. 2006. “Looking Towards the Future: How Possible Aged Selves Influence 
Prejudice Towards Older Adults.” Social Cognition 24:218–247. 
Parker, Marti and Thorslund Mats. 2007. “Health Trends in older adults Population: Getting Better and Getting Worse.” 
The Gerontologist 47:150–158. 
Pleis, J.R., J.W. Lucas, and B.W. Wared. 2009. “Summary Health Statistics for U.S. Adults: National Health Interview 
Survey, 2008.” Data from the National Health Survey, Series 10. No. 242. 
Polsky, L. R., Rentscher, K. E., & Carroll, J. E. (2022). Stress-induced biological aging: A review and guide for research 
priorities. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 104, 97-109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2022.05.016.  
Riley, Matilda White. 1978. “Aging, Social Change, and the Power of Ideas.” Daedalus 107:39–52. 
Schmidt, K. L., Merrill, S. M., Gill, R., Miller, G. E., Gadermann, A. M., & Kobor, M. S. (2021). Society to cell: How child 
poverty gets “under the skin” to influence child development and lifelong health. Developmental Review, 61, 
Article 100983  
Sharpe, P.A. 1995. “Older Women and Health Services: Moving from Ageism Toward Empowerment.” Women & Spector-
Mersel, Gabriela. 2006. “Never-Aging Stories: Western Hegemonic Masculinity Scripts.” Journal of Gender 
Studies 15:67–82. 
United Nations. 2020. “World Population Aging, 2019 Highlights.” United Nations. (https://www.un.org/en/ 
development/desa/population/publications/pdf/ageing/WorldPopulationAgeing2019-Highlights.pdf 

 
 
Whitbourne, Susan and Stacey Whitbourne. 2010. Adult Development and Aging: Biopsychosocial Perspectives. 4th ed. 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
5.3   Challenges Facing older adults 
Acierno, R., Melba A. Hernandez, Ananda B. Amstadter, Heidi S. Resnick, Kenneth Steve, Wendy Muzzy, and Dean G. 
Kilpatrick. 2010. “Prevalence and Correlates of Emotional, Physical, Sexual, Financial Abuse and Potential 
Neglect in the United States.” American Journal of Public Health 100:292–7. 
Administration on Aging. 2009. “Data Sources on the Impact of the 2008 Financial Crisis on the Economic Well-being of 
Older Americans Aging Forum Report Issue #1.” Retrieved February 13, 2012 
(http://www.agingstats.gov/Main_Site/docs/DSOA_Aging_Brief.pdf). 
Brownell, Patricia. 2010. “Social Issues and Social Policy Response to Abuse and Neglect of Older Adults.” Pp. 1–16 in 
Aging, Ageism and Abuse: Moving from Awareness to Action, edited by G. Gutman and C. Spencer. Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands: Elsevier. 
Glantz, Aaron. 2010. “Suicide Rates Soar among WWII Vets, Records Show.” The Bay Citizen, November 11. Retrieved 
February 27, 2012 (http://www.baycitizen.org/veterans/story/suicide-rates-soar-among-wwii- 
vets/comments/#comments). 
Honor Flight Network. 2011. Retrieved September 22, 2011 (http://www.honorflight.org/). 
Kohn, Robert, and Wendy Verhoek-Oftedahl. 2011. “Caregiving and Elder Abuse.” Medicine & Health Rhode Island 
94(2):47–49. 
Becca R Levy, Martin D Slade, E-Shien Chang, Sneha Kannoth, Shi-Yi Wang, Ageism Amplifies Cost and Prevalence of 
Health Conditions, The Gerontologist, Volume 60, Issue 1, February 2020, Pages 174–
181, https://doi.org/10.1093/geront/gny131 
National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics. 2011. “VA Benefits and Health Care Utilization.” November 9. 
Retrieved February 13, 2012 (http://www.va.gov/Vetdata/docs/Quickfacts/ 4x6_fall_11_sharepoint_Final.pdf). 
National Center of Elder Abuse. 2011. “Major Types of Elder Abuse.” Retrieved January 21, 2012 
(http://ncea.aoa.gov/FAQ/Type_Abuse/). 
Stuart, Spencer. 2008. “Leading CEOs: A Statistical Snapshot of S&P 500 Leaders.” Retrieved February 13, 2012 
(http://content.spencerstuart.com/sswebsite/pdf/lib/2005_CEO_Study_JS.pdf). 
Thornton, M., & Bowers, K. (2024). Poverty in older adulthood: A health and social crisis. Online Journal of Issues in 
Nursing, 29(1), Manuscript 3. https://doi.org/10.3912/OJIN.Vol29No01Man03 
Urban Institute and Kaiser Commission. 2010. “Poverty Rate by Age.” Retrieved January 21, 2012 
(http://www.statehealthfacts.org/comparebar.jsp?ind=10&cat=1"). 
U.S. Census Bureau. 2009. “Webinar on 2008 Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Estimates from the Current 
Population Survey.” Retrieved February 13, 2012 (http://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/ 
archives/news_conferences/2009-09-10_remarks_johnson.html). 
U.S. Department of Veteran Affairs. 2010. “Veteran Population Projections FY 2000 to FY2036.” December. Retrieved 
February 13, 2012 (http://www.va.gov/vetdata/docs/quickfacts/Population-slideshow.pdf). 
Xiang, S., Xiang, H., Ren, Q., & Deng, Q. (2025). Caring alone: older adult care burdens, practices, and structural 
imbalances among China's one-child generation. Frontiers in public health, 13, 1694636. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2025.1694636 
 

 
 
5.4   Theoretical Perspectives on Aging 
Abner, Carrie. 2006. “Graying Prisons: States Face Challenges of an Aging Inmate Population.” State News, 
November/December. 
Atchley, R.C. 1971. "Retirement and Leisure Participation: Continuity or Crisis?" The Gerontologist 11:13–17 
Atchley, R.C. 1989. "A Continuity Theory of Normal Aging." The Gerontologist 29:183–190. 
Baltes, Paul, and Margret Baltes, eds. 1990. Successful Aging: Perspectives from The Behavioral Sciences. New York: 
Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge. 
Cowgill, D.O. and L.D. Holmes, eds. 1972. Aging and Modernization. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
Crosnoe, Robert, and Glen H. Elder. 2002. “Life Course Transitions, the Generational Stake, and Grandparent- Grandchild 
Relationships.” Journal of Marriage and Family 64(4):1089–1096. 
Cumming, Elaine, and William Earl Henry. 1961. Growing Old. New York: Basic. 
Dowd, James J. 1975. "Aging as Exchange: A Preface to Theory." Journal of Gerontology 30:584–594. Havinghurst, R.J. 
1961. "Successful Aging." The Gerontologist 1:8–13. 
Havinghurst, Robert, Bernice Neugarten, and Sheldon Tobin. 1968. “Patterns of Aging.” Pp. 161–172 in Middle Age and 
Aging, edited by B. Neugarten. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 
Hothschild, Arlie. 1975. “Disengagement Theory: A Critique and Proposal.” American Sociological Review 
40:563–569. 
Human Rights Watch. 2012. Old Behind Bars: The Aging Prison Population in the United States. Retrieved February 2, 
2012 (http://www.hrw.org/reports/2012/01/27/old-behind-bars). 
Leadership Conference. N.d. “Chapter Three: Race, Sentencing and the “Tough Crime” Movement.” Retrieved February 2, 
2012 (http://www.civilrights.org/publications/justice-on-trial/sentencing.html). 
Lemon, B., V. Bengtson, and J. Petersen. 1972. “An Exploration of the Activity Theory of Aging: Activity Types and Life 
Expectation among In-Movers to a Retirement Community.” Journal of Gerontology 27:511–23. 
Li, Wiehua and Lewis, Nicole. 2020. “This Chart Shows Why the Prison Population Is So Vulnerable to 
COVID-19.” The Marshall Project. (https://www.themarshallproject.org/2020/03/19/this-chart-shows-why- the-prison-
population-is-so-vulnerable-to-covid-19) 
Reese, Hope. 2019. “What Should We Do About Our Aging Prison Population?” JSTOR Daily. (https://daily.jstor.org/what-
should-we-do-about-our-aging-prison-population/) 
Riley, Matilda While, Marilyn Johnson, and Anne Foner. 1972. Aging and Society. Volume III, A Sociology of Age 
Stratification. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 
Rose, Arnold. 1960. “The Subculture of the Aging: A Topic for Sociological Research.” The Gerontologist, 2:123–127. 
Tornstam Lars. 2005. Gerotranscendence: A Developmental Theory of Positive Aging. New York: Springer Publishing 
Company. 
U.S. Census Bureau. 2011. Statistical Abstract 2011: Table 147. Retrieved February 13, 2012 
(http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/cats/health_nutrition/medicare_medicaid.html). 
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 2012. “The Age Discrimination in Employment Act 1967 (ADEA).” 
Retrieved January 30, 2012 (http://www.eeoc.gov/laws/statutes/adea.cfm). 

 
 
Warren, Jenifer. 2002. “The Graying of the Prisons.” Los Angeles Times, June 9. Retrieved February 2, 2012 
(http://articles.latimes.com/2002/jun/09/local/me-cons9).