Chapter 7: Groups and Organizations 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
Throughout the history of the United States, individuals have formed groups to achieve goals and bring about change. 
Some groups are loosely defined, while others have highly organized structure and mission. And in some cases, groups 
can have significant influence on culture, society, the economy, and government. 
In 2009, people protesting government 
spending held a series of “tea parties,” 
referencing the Boston Tea Party, an anti-
taxation event that led up to the 
Revolutionary War. Tea Party activists also 
opposed big government, high taxes, and 
political corruption and supported gun rights 
and traditional family values. They called for 
“awareness to any issue which challenges 
the security, sovereignty, or domestic 
tranquility of our beloved nation, the United 
States of America” (Tea Party, Inc. 2021). 
The movement grew into a major political 
force, with chapters popping up in nearly 
every community across the country. 
By 2010, Tea Party candidates had won 
seats in the U.S. House of Representatives 
and the Senate, demonstrating the political 
power of the group and its message. As 
grassroots activism faded, the Tea Party gained influence within the Republican Party. Many of its ideas have been 
assimilated into the mainstream conservative movement and Republican Party platform. 
In 2016, Fox News host Gretchen Carlson sued chairman Roger Ailes for sexual harassment, prompting others to come 
forward with similar claims. Actress Alyssa Milano’s 2017 Twitter post popularized the phrase “Me Too,” originally 
coined in 2006 by activist Tarana Burke to empower women of color. A 2017 New York Times article broke the story 
that Harvey Weinstein had paid off actresses that he had abused for decades (Kantor & Twohey, 2017). The viral 
hashtag #MeToo sparked global awareness, millions sharing stories, reforms in institutions, reshaping responses to 
sexual abuse (MeTooMvmt.org, 2020). 
The Tea Party evolved into an organization. From a loosely associated set of local chapters, it developed into several 
closely affiliated nonprofits (filed with the IRS), a political faction within the Republican Party, and a caucus within 
Congress. What about the MeToo movement? Burke started it in 2006 and was working to enact change long before the 
hashtag sparked more awareness and new policies. The MeToo has brought together people to work in groups, but it 
has yet to form into a permanent MeToo organization. 
 
Figure 7.1   The national tour of the Tea Party Express visited 
Minnesota and held a rally outside the state capitol building. Tarana 
Burke, who originated the term “me too” in the context of supporting or 
acknowledging sexual harassment or assault victims, has spoken 
frequently on the evolution and issues regarding the MeToo movement. 
(Credit: a. Fibonacci Blue/flickr; b Marco Verch) 
7.1   Types of Groups  
7.2   Group Size and Structure  
7.3   Formal Organizations 

 
 
As enduring social units, groups help foster shared value systems and are key to the structure of society as we know it. 
There are three primary sociological perspectives for studying groups: Functionalist, Conflict, and Interactionist. We can 
look at the Tea Party and the MeToo movements through the lenses of these methods to better understand the roles 
and challenges that they offer. 
The Functionalist perspective is a big-picture, macro-level view that looks at how different aspects of society are 
intertwined. This perspective is based on the idea that society is a well-balanced system with all parts necessary to the 
whole, and it studies the roles these parts play in relation to the whole. A Functionalist might look at the macro-level 
needs that each movement serves. For example, a Structural Functionalist might ask how the Tea Party arose to voice 
the concerns of a large sector of society that felt politically underrepresented, or how MeToo drove people to pay 
attention to sexual harassment and gender inequality. This approach might look at how each group enabled the voicing 
of discontent and so stabilized society. 
The Conflict perspective is another macro-analytical view, one that highlights competition over scarce resources or 
influence. A scholar might explore how the Tea Party sought to counter interests it viewed as dominant in politics, or 
how #MeToo challenged institutional practices that hindered equity in workplaces.   
A third perspective is the Symbolic Interaction or Interactionist perspective. This method of analyzing groups takes a 
micro-level view. Instead of studying the big picture, these researchers look at the day-to-day interactions of groups. 
Studying these details, the Interactionist looks at issues like leadership style and group dynamics. In the case of the Tea 
Party Movement, Interactionists might ask, “How does the Tea Party dynamic in New York differ from that in Atlanta?” 
Or, in the case of the MeToo, researchers may seek to learn about who defines the agenda and approach within the 
movement. 
7.1 Types of Groups 
Most of us feel comfortable using the word “group” without giving it much thought. Often, we mean different things 
when using that word. We might say that a group of kids all saw the dog, and it could mean 250 students in a lecture 
hall or four siblings playing on a front lawn. In everyday use, it can be a generic term, although it carries important 
clinical and scientific meanings. Moreover, the concept of a group is central to much of how we think about society and 
human interaction. So how can we hone the meaning more precisely for sociological purposes? 
Defining a Group 
The term group is an amorphous one and can refer to a wide variety of gatherings, from just two people (think about a 
“group project” in school when you partner with another student), a club, a regular gathering of friends, or people who 
work together or share a hobby. In short, the term refers to any collection of at least two people who interact with some 
frequency and who share a sense that their identity is somehow aligned with the group. Of course, every time people are 
gathered, it is not necessarily a group. A rally is usually a one-time event, for instance, and belonging to a political party 
doesn’t imply interaction with others. People who happen to be in the same place at the same time but who do not 
interact or share a sense of identity—such as a bunch of people standing in line at Starbucks—are considered an 
aggregate, or a crowd. 
Another example of a nongroup is people who share similar characteristics but are not tied to one another in any way. 
These people are considered a category, and as an example all children born from approximately 1980–2000 are 
referred to as “Millennials.” Why are Millennials a category and not a group? Because while some of them may share a 
sense of identity, they do not, as a whole, interact frequently with each other. 
Interestingly, people within an aggregate or category can become a group. During disasters, people in a neighborhood 
(an aggregate) who did not know each other might become friendly and depend on each other at the local shelter. After 
the disaster when people go back to simply living near each other, the feeling of cohesiveness may last since they have 
all shared an experience. They might remain a group, practicing emergency readiness, coordinating supplies for next 
time, or taking turns caring for neighbors who need extra help. 

 
 
Similarly, there may be many groups within a single category. Consider teachers, for example. Within this category, 
groups may exist like teachers’ unions, teachers who coach, or staff members who are involved with the PTA. 
Categories  
Sociologist Charles Horton Cooley (1864–1929) suggested that groups can broadly be divided into two categories: 
primary groups and secondary groups (Cooley 1909). According to Cooley, primary groups play the most critical role in 
our lives. The primary group is usually fairly small and is made up of individuals who generally engage face-to-face in 
long-term emotional ways. This group serves emotional needs: expressive functions rather than pragmatic ones. The 
primary group is usually made up of significant others, those individuals who have the most impact on our socialization. 
The best example of a primary group is the family. 
Secondary groups are often larger and impersonal. They may also be task-focused and time-limited. These groups serve 
an instrumental function rather than an expressive one, meaning that their role is more goal- or task-oriented than 
emotional. A classroom or office can be an example of a secondary group. 
Neither primary nor secondary groups are bound by strict definitions or set limits. In fact, people can move from one 
group to another. A group of coworkers, for example, can start as a secondary group, but as the employees work 
together over the years, they may find common interests and strong ties that transform them into a primary group. As 
we will discuss in the chapter on Media and Technology, even online networks of people with common interests can 
sometimes move from secondary to primary group status.  
In-Groups and Out-Groups 
One of the ways that groups can be powerful is through inclusion, and its inverse, exclusion. The feeling that we belong 
in an elite or select group is a heady one, while the feeling of not being allowed in, or of being in competition with a 
group, can be motivating in a different way. Sociologist William Sumner (1840–1910) developed the concepts of in-
group and out-group to explain this phenomenon (Sumner 1906). In short, an in-group is the group that an individual 
feels she belongs to, and she believes it to be an integral part of who she is. An out-group, conversely, is a group 
someone doesn’t belong to; often we may feel disdain or 
competition in relationship to an out-group. Sports 
teams, unions, and sororities are examples of in-groups 
and out-groups. Primary groups consist of both in-groups 
and out-groups, as do secondary groups. 
Group affiliations are not always neutral. They can 
sometimes lead to negative patterns, such as hostility or 
discrimination toward outsiders. For example, some 
extremist movements have used in-group loyalty to 
justify prejudice or violence. Often, in-groups can form 
within a secondary group. For instance, a workplace can 
have cliques of people, from senior executives who play 
golf together, to engineers who write code together, to 
young singles who socialize after hours. While these in-
groups might show favoritism and affinity for other in-
group members, the overall organization may be unable 
or unwilling to acknowledge it. Therefore, it pays to be 
wary of the politics of in-groups, since members may exclude others as a form of gaining status within the group. 
 
Figure 7.2   Engineering and construction students gather 
around a job site. How do your academic interests define 
your in- and out-groups? (Credit: 
USACEpublicaffairs/flickr) 

 
 
Reference Groups 
Big Picture 
Bullying and Cyberbullying: How Technology Has Changed the Game 
Most of us know that the old rhyme “sticks and stones may break my bones, but words will never hurt me” is 
inaccurate. Words can hurt, and never is that more apparent than in instances of bullying. Bullying often 
reaches extreme levels of cruelty in children and young adults. People at these stages of life are especially 
vulnerable to opinions of others and deeply invested in their peer groups. Today, cyberbullying is on the rise. 
Cyberbullying can involve sending threatening texts, harassing someone in a public forum (such as social 
media), hacking someone’s account and pretending to be them, posting embarrassing images online, and so 
on. A study by the Cyberbullying Research Center found that 28 percent of teens have been a victim of 
cyberbullying (Hinduja and Patchin, 2019). Severe bullying can lead to suicidal thoughts and suicide attempts 
(John, 2018). Researchers noted that students who experienced in-person and online bullying were eleven times 
more likely to attempt suicide (Hinduja, 2018). Whereas bullying face-to-face requires willingness to interact 
with your victim, cyberbullying allows bullies to harass others from the privacy of their homes without witnessing 
the damage firsthand. This form of bullying is particularly dangerous because it’s widely accessible and 
therefore easier to carry out. Cyberbullying can create a feeling of powerlessness and inescapability because 
victimization is not constrained to physical locations. Many victims report being harassed across multiple 
platforms or formats at the same time. 
Cyberbullying first made international headlines in 2010 when a fifteen-year-old girl, Phoebe Prince, in South 
Hadley, Massachusetts, died by suicide after being relentlessly bullied by girls at her school. In the aftermath of 
her death, the bullies were prosecuted and the state passed anti-bullying legislation. This marked a significant 
change in how bullying, including cyberbullying, is viewed in the United States. Now there are numerous 
resources for schools, families, and communities to provide education and prevention on this issue. Social 
media platforms and their parent companies are also taking steps (often under pressure from communities) to 
improve cyberbullying detection and reporting capabilities. 
According to a report released in 2013 by the National Center for Educational Statistics, close to 1 in every 3 
(27.8 percent) students report being bullied by their school peers. Seventeen percent of students reported being 
the victims of cyberbullying. Overall, LGBTQ youth are targeted at a higher rate than other youth, and members 
of minority populations overall are more likely to be cyberbullying victims (Hinjuda & Patchin, 2020). Finally, 
adults (particularly college students) are also frequent cyberbullying victims and perpetrators. 
 
Figure 7.3   Athletes are often viewed as a 
reference group for young people. (Credit: 
nonorganical/flickr) 

 
 
A reference group is a group that people compare themselves to—it provides a standard of measurement. In U.S. 
society, peer groups are common reference groups. Kids and adults pay attention to what their peers wear, what music 
they like, what they do with their free time—and they compare themselves to what they see. Most people have more 
than one reference group, so a middle school boy might look not just at his classmates but also at his older brother’s 
friends and see a different set of norms. And he might observe the behaviors of his favorite athletes for yet another 
point of reference. 
Some other examples of reference groups can be one’s cultural center, workplace, family gathering, and even parents. 
Often, reference groups convey competing messages. For instance, on television and in movies, young adults often have 
wonderful apartments and cars and lively social lives despite not holding a job. In music videos, young women might 
dance and sing in a sexually aggressive way that suggests experience beyond their years. At all ages, we use reference 
groups to help guide our behavior and establish our social norms. So how important is it to surround yourself with 
positive reference groups? You may not recognize a reference group, but it still influences the way you act. Identifying 
your reference groups can help you understand the source of the social identities you aspire to or want to distance 
yourself from. 
7.2   Group Size and Structure  
Dyads, Triads, and Large Groups  
A small group is typically one where the collection of people is small enough that all members of the group know each 
other and share simultaneous interaction, such as a nuclear family, a dyad, or a triad. Georg Simmel (1858–1915) 
wrote extensively about the difference between a dyad, or two-member group, and a triad, which is a three-member 
group (Simmel 1902). In the former, if one person withdraws, the group can no longer exist. We can think of a divorce, 
which effectively ends the “group” of the married couple or of two best friends never speaking again. In a triad, however, 
the dynamic is quite different. If one person withdraws, the group lives on. A triad has a different set of relationships. If 
there are three in the group, two-against-one dynamics can develop, and a majority opinion may form on any issue. 
Small groups generally have strong internal cohesiveness and a sense of connection. Small groups may face challenges 
when trying to achieve large goals. They can struggle to be heard or to be a force for change if they are pushing against 
larger groups. 
It is difficult to define exactly when a small group becomes a large group. Perhaps it occurs when one group grows so 
large that there are too many people to join in a simultaneous discussion. Sometimes it occurs when a group joins with 
other groups as part of a movement. These larger groups may share a geographic space, such as a fraternity or sorority 
on the same campus, or they might be spread out around the globe. The larger the group, the more attention it can 
garner, and the more pressure members can put toward whatever goal they wish to achieve. At the same time, the 
larger the group becomes, the more the risk grows for division and lack of cohesion.   

 
 
Group Leadership  
Often, larger groups require some kind of leadership. In small, 
primary groups, leadership tends to be informal. After all, most 
families don’t take a vote on who will rule the group, nor do most 
groups of friends. This is not to say that de facto leaders don’t 
emerge, but formal leadership is rare. In secondary groups, 
leadership is usually more overt. They often outline roles and 
responsibilities, with a chain of command to follow. Some 
secondary groups, like the military, have highly structured and 
clearly understood chains of command, and sometimes lives 
depend on those. After all, how well could soldiers function in a 
battle if different people were calling out orders and if they had 
no idea whom to listen to? Other secondary groups, like a 
workplace or a classroom, also have formal leaders, but the 
styles and functions of leadership can vary significantly. 
Leadership function refers to the main goal of the leader, which may be instrumental or expressive. An instrumental 
leader is one who is goal-oriented and largely concerned with accomplishing set tasks. We can imagine that an army 
general or a Fortune 500 CEO would be an instrumental leader. In contrast, expressive leaders are more concerned with 
promoting emotional strength and health, and ensuring that people feel supported. Social and religious leaders—rabbis, 
priests, imams, directors of youth homes and social service programs—are often perceived as expressive leaders.  
Sociologists have long observed that cultures sometimes associate instrumental roles with men and expressive roles 
with women. Individuals who adopt leadership styles not traditionally linked with their gender may encounter social 
 
Figure 7.5   Cadets illustrate how strongly 
conformity can define groups. (Credit: West Point — 
The U.S. Military Academy/flickr) 

 
 
resistance. However, research suggests that effective leaders—regardless of gender—combine both instrumental and 
expressive skills (Boatwright and Forrest, 2000). 
Sociologists recognize three leadership styles. Democratic leaders encourage group participation in all decision making. 
They work hard to build consensus before choosing a course of action and moving forward. This type of leader is 
particularly common, for example, in a club where the members vote on which activities or projects to pursue. 
Democratic leaders can be well liked, but there is often a danger that decisions will proceed slowly since consensus 
Sociological Research 
Conforming to Expectations 
In 1951, psychologist Solomon Asch sat a small group of about eight people around a table. Only one of the 
people sitting there was the true subject; the rest were associates of the experimenter. However, the subject 
was led to believe that the others were all, like him, people brought in for an experiment in visual judgments. 
The group was shown two cards, the first card with a single vertical line, and the second card with three vertical 
lines differing in length. The experimenter polled the group and asked each participant one at a time which line 
on the second card matched up with the line on the first card. 
However, this was not really a test of visual judgment. Rather, it was Asch’s study on the pressures of 
conformity. He was curious to see what the effect of multiple wrong answers would be on the subject, who 
presumably was able to tell which lines matched. To test this, Asch had each planted respondent answer in a 
specific way. The subject was seated in such a way that he had to hear almost everyone else’s answers before it 
was his turn. Sometimes the non-subject members would unanimously choose an answer that was clearly 
wrong. 
So what was the conclusion? Asch found that thirty-seven out of fifty test subjects responded with an “obviously 
erroneous” answer at least once. When faced by a unanimous wrong answer from the rest of the group, the 
subject conformed to a mean of four of the staged answers. Asch revised the study and repeated it, wherein the 
subject still heard the staged wrong answers, but was allowed to write down his answer rather than speak it 
aloud. In this version, the number of examples of conformity––giving an incorrect answer so as not to contradict 
the group––fell by two thirds. He also found that group size had an impact on how much pressure the subject 
felt to conform. 
The results showed that speaking up when only one other person gave an erroneous answer was far more 
common than when five or six people defended the incorrect position. Finally, Asch discovered that people were 
far more likely to give the correct answer in the face of near-unanimous consent if they had a single ally. If even 
one person in the group also dissented, the subject conformed only a quarter as often. Clearly, it was easier to 
be a minority of two than a minority of one. 
Asch concluded that there are two main causes for conformity: people want to be liked by the group or they 
believe the group is better informed than they are. He found his study results disturbing. To him, they revealed 
that intelligent, well-educated people would, with very little coaxing, go along with an untruth. He believed this 
result highlighted real problems with the education system and values in our society (Asch 1956). 
Stanley Milgram, a Yale psychologist, had similar results in his experiment that is now known simply as the 
Milgram Experiment. In 1962, Milgram found that research subjects were willing to perform acts that directly 
conflicted with their consciences when directed by a person of authority. In the experiment, subjects were willing 
to administer painful, even supposedly deadly, shocks to others who answered questions incorrectly. 
To learn more about similar research, visit http://www.prisonexp.org/ 

 
 
building is time-consuming. A further risk is that group members might pick sides and entrench themselves into 
opposing factions rather than reaching a solution. 

 
 
 
Big Picture: Women Political Candidates 
 
Figure 7.6   Vice President Kamala Harris exemplifies the increasing representation of women and people of 
color in national leadership roles.  (Credit: California National Guard/flickr) 
 Kamala Harris became the first woman and the first person of Black and South Asian descent elected vice 
president of the United States in 2020. Her candidacy followed a long history of women who have sought 
national office—including Shirley Chisholm, Lenora Fulani, Jill Stein, and Hillary Clinton—but the U.S. has not yet 
elected a woman president. In 2024, she became the first woman of color to run for president on a major party 
ticket.  
Researchers and political analysts have long established that gender plays a significant role in how political 
leaders (both candidates and elected officials) are perceived. As a starting point, research indicates that, even 
among women, the public prefer masculine qualities in presidents. For example, a study in which subjects 
completed the Bem Sex-Role Inventory and Implicit Leadership Inventory found that the hypothetical “Ideal” 
president possessed more masculine qualities than feminine qualities (Powell and Butterfield 2011). 
In addition, some studies describe what they term the “likability dilemma,” where social expectations about 
leadership and gender roles can conflict. When men display ambition or assertiveness, audiences may respond 
neutrally or positively; when women display the same traits, assessments may differ (Conroy, Martin, and 
Nadler, 2020). 
These same perceptions present themselves in the workplace. Prescriptive stereotypes—that is, ideas about 
how men or women should behave—limit women’s advancement to leadership positions. Men are often 
appreciated for being ambitious, while women who exhibit assertive behavior are generally perceived as selfish 
or overly competitive (Baldoni, 2020). Furthermore, when men help out in the workplace, their contribution is 
appreciated while the same task carried out by women goes unacknowledged. Scholars observe that women 
are underrepresented in the top levels of U.S. businesses and Fortune 500 companies (Heilman 2012). 

 
 
In contrast, a laissez-faire (French for “leave it alone”) leader is hands-off, allowing group members to self-manage and 
make their own decisions. An example of this kind of leader might be an art teacher who opens the art cupboard, leaves 
materials on the shelves, and tells students to help themselves and make some art. While this style can work well with 
highly motivated and mature participants who have clear goals and guidelines, it risks group dissolution and a lack of 
progress. 
Finally, authoritarian leaders issue orders and assign tasks with little to no feedback from group members. 
Authoritarian is a term often used in popular culture as a negative characteristic describing people in ways that diminish 
the power and control of others. As a sociological term, this term refers to instrumental leaders with a strong focus on 
meeting goals. Often, entrepreneurs fall into this mold, like Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg. Not surprisingly, 
authoritarian leaders risk alienating the workers. When decisions need to made quickly or informed by a high level of 
expertise, however, this style of leadership can be required.  
In different circumstances, each of these leadership styles can be effective and successful. Consider what leadership 
style you prefer. Why? Do you like the same style in different areas of your life, such as a classroom, a workplace, and a 
sports team?  
Conformity  
We all like to fit in to some degree. Likewise, if we want to stand out, then we want to choose how we stand out and for 
what reasons. For example, a person who loves cutting-edge fashion might dress in thought-provoking new styles to set 
a new trend. 
Conformity is the extent to which an individual complies with group norms or expectations. As you might recall, we use 
reference groups to assess and understand how to act, to dress, and to behave. Not surprisingly, young people are 
particularly aware of who conforms and who does not. A high school boy whose mother makes him wear ironed button-
down shirts might protest that everyone else wears T-shirts and he will look stupid. Another high school boy might like 
wearing those shirts as a way of standing out. How much do you enjoy being noticed? Do you consciously prefer to 
conform to group norms so as not to be singled out? Are there people in your class who immediately come to mind 
when you think about those who don’t want to conform? 
Psychologist Solomon Asch (1907–1996) conducted experiments that illustrated how great the pressure to conform is, 
specifically within a small group (1956). Read about his work in the Sociological Research feature and consider what 
you would do in Asch’s experiment. Would you speak up? What would help you speak up and what would discourage it?  
The Bystander Effect and Diffusion of Responsibility 
Social psychologists have recognized that other people’s presence influences our behavior, whether we are aware of it 
or not. One example is the bystander effect, a situation in which people are less likely to interfere during an emergency 
or when a social norm is being violated if there are others around. They feel less responsible because of the presence of 
other bystanders (Beyer et al., 2017). This is known as diffusion of responsibility. 
Most of the time people report that they don’t want to get involved and that’s why they don’t respond when they see 
something wrong. They assume someone else will step up and help. Researchers have found that people are less likely 
to help if they don’t know the victim (Cherry 2020). 
Think about it this way, you’re walking to class and there are several students around. Someone falls on the ground 
having a seizure. What would you do? The bystander effect suggests that unless you know the person who has fallen, 
you are more likely to walk away than help. However, social psychologists believe that you are much more likely to help, 
or at least stop and check, if you are the only one around.  
7.3   Formal Organizations  
A complaint of modern life is that society is dominated by large and impersonal secondary organizations. From schools 
to businesses to healthcare to government, these organizations, referred to as formal organizations, are highly 

 
 
bureaucratized. Indeed, all formal 
organizations are, or likely will become, 
bureaucracies. We will discuss the 
purpose of formal organizations and the 
structure of their bureaucracies. 
Types of Formal Organizations  
Sociologist Amitai Etzioni (1975) 
posited that formal organizations fall 
into three categories. Normative 
organizations, also called voluntary 
organizations, are based on shared 
interests. As the name suggests, joining 
them is voluntary. People find 
membership rewarding in an intangible way. They receive non-material benefits. The Audubon Society and a ski club are 
examples of normative organizations. 
Coercive organizations are groups that we must be coerced, or pushed, to join. These may include prison or a 
rehabilitation center. Symbolic interactionist Erving Goffman states that most coercive organizations are total 
institutions (1961). A total institution is one in which inmates or military soldiers live a controlled lifestyle and in which 
total resocialization takes place. 
The third type is utilitarian organizations, which, as the name suggests, are joined because of the need for a specific 
material reward. High school and the workplace fall into this category—one joined in pursuit of a diploma, the other in 
order to make money. 
The Structure of Bureaucracies 
Bureaucracies are an ideal type of formal organization. By ideal, sociologists don’t mean “best.” Rather, bureaucracies 
have a collection of characteristics that most of them exhibit. Pioneer sociologist Max Weber characterized a 
bureaucracy as having a hierarchy of authority, a clear division of labor, explicit rules, and impersonality (1922). People 
often complain about bureaucracies––declaring them slow, rule-bound, difficult to navigate, and unfriendly. Let’s take a 
look at terms that define a bureaucracy to understand what they mean. 
Hierarchy of authority refers to the chain of command that places one individual or office in charge of another, who in 
turn must answer to her own superiors. For example, as an employee at Walmart, your shift manager assigns you tasks. 
Your shift manager answers to his store manager, who must answer to her regional manager, and so on, up to the CEO 
who must answer to the board members, who in turn answer to the stockholders. Everyone in this bureaucracy follows 
the chain of command. 
Bureaucracies have a clear division of labor: each individual has a specialized task to perform. For example, at a 
university, psychology professors teach psychology, but they do not attempt to provide students with financial aid forms. 
The Office of Admissions often takes on this task. In this case, it is a clear and commonsense division. But what about in 
 
Normative or Voluntary 
Coercive 
Utilitarian 
Benefit of Membership 
Intangible benefit 
Corrective benefit 
Tangible benefit 
Type of Membership 
Volunteer basis 
Required 
Contractual basis 
Feeling of Connectedness 
Shared affinity 
No affinity 
Some affinity 
Table 7.1   Table of Formal Organizations   This table shows Etzioni’s three types of formal organizations. 
(Credit: Etzioni 1975) 
 
Figure 7.7   Girl Scout troops and correctional facilities are both formal 
organizations. (Credit: (a) moonlightbulb/flickr; (b) CxOxS/flickr) 

 
 
a restaurant where food is backed up in the kitchen and a hostess is standing nearby texting on her phone? Her job is to 
seat customers, not to deliver food. Is this a smart division of labor? 
Bureaucracies have explicit rules, rules that are outlined, written down, and standardized. For example, at your college 
or university, the student guidelines are contained within the Student Handbook. As technology changes and campuses 
encounter new concerns like cyberbullying, identity theft, and other problems that arise, organizations scramble to 
ensure their explicit rules cover these emerging issues. 
Finally, bureaucracies are also characterized by impersonality, which takes personal feelings out of professional 
situations. This characteristic grew, to some extent, out of a desire to avoid nepotism, backroom deals, and other types 
of favoritism, while simultaneously protecting customers and others served by the organization. Impersonality 
Bureaucracies can effectively and efficiently serve volumes of customers quickly. However, explicit rules, clear division 
of labor, and a strict hierarchy of authority does not allow them to easily adjust to unique or new situations. As a result, 
customers frequently complain that stores with bureaucratic structures, like Walmart, care little about individuals, other 
businesses, and the community at large.  
Bureaucracies are often meritocracies, meaning that hiring and promotion is based on proven and documented skills, 
rather than on nepotism or random choice. In order to get into a prestigious college, you need to perform well on the 
SAT and have an impressive transcript. In order to become a lawyer and represent clients, you must graduate law school 
and pass the state bar exam. Of course, there are many well-documented examples of success by those who did not 
proceed through traditional meritocracies. Think about technology companies with founders who dropped out of college, 
or performers who became famous after a YouTube video went viral. 
In addition, organizations that aspire to become meritocracies encounter challenges. How well do you think established 
meritocracies identify talent?  Challenges can arise when access to preparation resources—such as tutoring or test 
coaching—is uneven. This may call into question how well institutions identify talent and opportunity fairly.  
There are several positive aspects of bureaucracies. They are intended to improve efficiency, ensure equal opportunities, 
and serve a large population. And there are times when rigid hierarchies are needed. But remember that many of our 
bureaucracies grew large at the same time that our school model was developed––during the Industrial Revolution. 
Young workers were trained, and organizations were built for mass production, assembly line work, and factory jobs. In 
these scenarios, a clear chain of command was critical. Now, in the information age, this kind of rigid training and 
adherence to protocol can actually decrease both productivity and efficiency.  
Bureaucracies offer advantages—efficiency, scalability, and consistency—but can also become rigid or slow to 
adapt.  Today’s workplace requires a faster pace, more problem solving, and a flexible approach to work. Too much 
adherence to explicit rules and a division of labor can leave an organization behind. And unfortunately, once 
established, bureaucracies can take on a life of their own.   Many originated during the Industrial Revolution, when fixed 
hierarchies suited factory production. Modern organizations, in contrast, often need flexibility to respond quickly to 
innovation. 

 
 
Michels (1911) suggested that all large organizations 
are characterized by the Iron Rule of Oligarchy, 
wherein an entire organization is ruled by a few 
elites. Do you think this is true? Can a large 
organization be collaborative? 
The McDonaldization of Society 
 The McDonaldization of Society (Ritzer 1993) 
describes the spread of the fast-food model to 
institutions like government, education, and 
relationships, based on efficiency, predictability, 
calculability, and control. For example, chain stores 
use specialized roles (efficiency), consistent products (predictability), quantifiable sales (calculability), and uniformed 
staff monitored by cameras (control). Though it boosts profits and accessibility, it reduces product variety and 
uniqueness, prompting some "de-McDonaldization" trends like farmers markets. In education, standardized testing 
aims for efficiency but has mixed results, while healthcare sees consolidation, telemedicine, and AI to meet rising 
demands (Fuchs 1997). 
 
 
Key Terms 
aggregate: a collection of people who exist in the same place at the same time, but who don’t interact or share a sense 
of identity 
authoritarian leader: a leader who issues orders and assigns tasks 
bureaucracies: formal organizations characterized by a hierarchy of authority, a clear division of labor, explicit rules, and 
impersonality. 
category: people who share similar characteristics but who are not connected in any way 
clear division of labor: the fact that each individual in a bureaucracy has a specialized task to perform 
coercive organizations: organizations that people do not voluntarily join, such as prison or a mental hospital 
Sociology in the Real World 
Secrets of the McJob 
 Fast food restaurants often face criticism for their environmental impact, role in obesity, and low-wage jobs known 
as "McJobs." However, Jerry Newman's undercover work in seven fast food chains revealed hardworking employees, 
skilled management, and the importance of frontline workers. Some businesses like Costco and Chipotle offer better 
wages, benefits, or responsibly sourced food, challenging the stereotypical view of fast food jobs. These roles can 
play a significant part in the economy and career development, sparking debate on their value versus being dead-end 
jobs. 
So, what do you think? Are these McJobs and the organizations that offer them still serving an important role in the 
economy and people’s careers? Or are they dead-end jobs that typify all that is negative about large bureaucracies? 
Have you ever worked in one? Would you? 
 
Figure 7.8   This McDonald’s storefront in Egypt shows the 
McDonaldization of society. (Credit: s_w_ellis/flickr) 

 
 
conformity: the extent to which an individual complies with group or societal norms 
democratic leader: a leader who encourages group participation and consensus-building before moving into action 
dyad: a two-member group 
explicit rules: the types of rules in a bureaucracy; rules that are outlined, recorded, and standardized 
expressive function: a group function that serves an emotional need 
expressive leader: a leader who is concerned with process and with ensuring everyone’s emotional wellbeing 
formal organizations: large, impersonal organizations 
group: any collection of at least two people who interact with some frequency and who share some sense of aligned 
identity 
hierarchy of authority: a clear chain of command found in a bureaucracy 
impersonality: the removal of personal feelings from a professional situation 
in-group: a group a person belongs to and feels is an integral part of his identity 
instrumental function: being oriented toward a task or goal 
instrumental leader: a leader who is goal oriented with a primary focus on accomplishing tasks 
iron rule of oligarchy: the theory that an organization is ruled by a few elites rather than through collaboration 
laissez-faire leader: a hands-off leader who allows members of the group to make their own decisions 
leadership function: the main focus or goal of a leader 
leadership style: the style a leader uses to achieve goals or elicit action from group members 
McDonaldization of society: the increasing presence of the fast-food business model in common social institutions 
meritocracy: a bureaucracy where membership and advancement is based on merit—proven and documented skills 
normative or voluntary organizations: organizations that people join to pursue shared interests or because they provide 
some intangible rewards 
out-group: a group that an individual is not a member of, and may even compete with 
primary groups: small, informal groups of people who are closest to us 
reference groups: groups to which an individual compares herself 
secondary groups: larger and more impersonal groups that are task-focused and time limited 
total institution: an organization in which participants live a controlled lifestyle and in which total resocialization occurs 
triad: a three-member group 
utilitarian organizations: organizations that are joined to fill a specific material need 
 

 
 
References 
Introduction 
Cabrel, Javier. 2011. “NOFX - Occupy LA.” LAWeekly.com, November 28. Retrieved December 13, 2021 
(https://www.laweekly.com/nofx-occupy-la-11-28-2011/). 
Kantor, Jodi & Twohey, Megan. 2017. Harvey Weinstein Paid of Sexual Harassment Accusers for Decades. The New York 
Times, published October 5, 2017. Accessed November 2024 at: 
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/05/us/harvey-weinstein-harassment-allegations.html 
Tea Party, Inc. 2014. “Tea Party.” Retrieved December 31, 2020 (http://www.teaparty.org). 
MeTooMvmt.org, 2021. “History and Inception.” Retrieved December 31, 2020. (https://metoomvmt.org/get-to-know-
us/history-inception/). 
7.1   Types of Groups 
Cooley, Charles Horton.1963 [1909]. Social Organizations: A Study of the Larger Mind. New York: Shocken. 
Cyberbullying Research Center. n.d. Retrieved November 30, 2011 (http://www.cyberbullying.us). 
Hinduja, Sameer. 2018. "Bullying, Cyberbullying, and Suicide Among US Youth: Our Updated Research Findings." 
Cyberbullying Research Center, https://cyberbullying.org/bullying-cyberbullying-suicide-among-us-youth. 
Hinduja, Sameer, and Justin W. Patchin.2019. “Summary of Our Cyberbullying Research (2007-2019).” Cyberbullying 
Research Center, https://cyberbullying.org/summary-of-our-cyberbullying-research/. Retrieved February 14, 
Hinduja, S. & Patchin, J. W. (2020). Bullying, Cyberbullying, and Sexual Orientation/Gender Identity. Cyberbullying Re- 
search Center (cyberbullying.org). 
John, Ann. “Self-Harm, Suicidal Behaviours, and Cyberbullying in Children and Young People: Systematic Review.” 
Journal of Medical Internet Research. https://www.jmir.org/2018/4/e129/ 
Khandaroo, Stacy T. 2010. “Phoebe Prince Case a ‘Watershed’ in Fight Against School Bullying.” Christian Science 
Monitor, April 1. Retrieved February 10, 2012 (http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Education/2010/0401/Phoebe-
Prince-case-a-watershed-in-fight-against-school-bullying). 
Occupy Wall Street. Retrieved November 27, 2011. (http://occupywallst.org/about/). 
Schwartz, Mattathias. 2011. “Pre-Occupied: The Origins and Future of Occupy Wall St.” New Yorker Magazine, November 
28. 
Sumner, William. 1959 [1906]. Folkways. New York: Dover. 
“Times Topics: Occupy Wall Street.” New York Times. 2011. Retrieved February 10, 2012 
(http://topics.nytimes.com/top/reference/timestopics/organizations/o/occupy_wall_street/index.html?scp=1-
spot&sq=occupy%20wall%20street&st=cse). 
We Are the 99 Percent. Retrieved November 28, 2011 (http://wearethe99percent.tumblr.com/page/2). 
7.2   Group Size and Structure 
Asch, Solomon. 1956. “Studies of Independence and Conformity: A Minority of One Against a Unanimous Majority.” 
Psychological Monographs 70(9, Whole No. 416). 

 
 
Baldoni, John. 2020. "Double-edged workplace ambition: Good for men, bad for women." SmartBrief. August 7, 2020. 
https://www.smartbrief.com/original/2020/08/double-edged-workplace-ambition-good-men-bad-women 
Boatwright, K.J., and L. Forrest. 2000. “Leadership Preferences: The Influence of Gender and Needs for Connection on 
Workers’ Ideal Preferences for Leadership Behaviors.” The Journal of Leadership Studies 7(2): 18–34. 
Beyer, F., Sidarus, N., Bonicalzi, S., & Haggard, P. (2017). Beyond self-serving bias: diffusion of responsibility reduces 
sense of agency and outcome monitoring. Social cognitive and affective neuroscience, 12(1), 138–145. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsw160 
Cherry, K. 2020. “The Diffusion of Responsibility Concept in Psychology.” Very Well Mind. Retrieved October 28, 2020 
(https://www.verywellmind.com/what-is-diffusion-of-responsibility-2795095). 
Conroy, M,, Martin, D. J., and Nalder. KL. (2020). “Gender, Sex, and the Role of Stereotypes in Evaluations of Hillary 
Clinton and the 2016 Presidential Candidates.” Journal of Women, Politics & Policy 41(2): 194-218. 
Cox, Ana Marie. 2006. “How Americans View Hillary: Popular but Polarizing.” Time, August 19. Retrieved February 10, 
2012 (http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1229053,00.html). 
Dowd, Maureen. 2008. “Can Hillary Cry Her Way to the White House?” New York Times, January 9. Retrieved February 
10, 2012 (http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/09/opinion/08dowd.html?pagewanted=all). 
Heilman, Madeline E. 2012. “Gender stereotypes and workplace bias.” Research in Organizational Behavior. 32: 113-
HeroicImagination TV. (2011, September 28). The Bystander Effect. [Video]. YouTube. 
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z4S1LLrSzVE). 
Kurtieben, Danielle. 2010. “Sarah Palin, Hillary Clinton, Michelle Obama, and Women in Politics.” US News and World 
Report, September 30. Retrieved February 10, 2012 
(http://www.usnews.com/opinion/articles/2010/09/30/sarah-palin-hillary-clinton-michelle-obama-and-women-
in-politics). 
Milgram, Stanley. 1963. “Behavioral Study of Obedience.” Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 67: 371–378. 
Simmel, Georg. 1950. The Sociology of Georg Simmel. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press. 
Weeks, Linton. 2011. “The Feminine Effect on Politics.” National Public Radio (NPR), June 9. Retrieved February 10, 
2012 (http://www.npr.org/2011/06/09/137056376/the-feminine-effect-on-presidential-politics). 
7.3   Formal Organizations 
Di Meglio, Francesca. 2007. “Learning on the McJob.” Bloomberg Businessweek, March 22. Retrieved February 10, 
2012 (http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2007-03-22/learning-on-the-mcjobbusinessweek-business-news-
stock-market-and-financial-advice). 
Etzioni, Amitai. 1975. A Comparative Analysis of Complex Organizations: On Power, Involvement, and Their Correlates. 
New York: Free Press. 
Fuchs, Victor R.. 1997. “Managed Care and Merger Mania,” JAMA 277.11 (920-921). 
Goffman, Erving. 1961. Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates. Chicago, IL: 
Aldine. 
Michels, Robert. 1949 [1911]. Political Parties. Glencoe, IL: Free Press. 
Newman, Jerry. 2007. My Secret Life on the McJob. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

 
 
Ritzer, George. 1993. The McDonaldization of Society. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge. 
Schlosser, Eric. 2001. Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of the All-American Meal. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. 
United States Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor Statistics Occupational Outlook Handbook, 2010–2011 Edition. 
Retrieved February 10, 2012 (http://www.bls.gov/oco/ocos162.htm). 
Weber, Max. 1968 [1922]. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretative Sociology. New York: Bedminster.