Chapter 11: Population and Urbanization 
 
 
Introduction 
Fracking, another word for hydraulic fracturing, is a method used to recover gas and oil from shale by drilling down into 
the earth and directing a high-pressure mixture of water, sand, and proprietary chemicals into the rock. The process of 
fracking allows the extraction of energy resources that otherwise would not be possible or practical. While energy 
companies view fracking as a profitable revolution in the industry, others believe the method causes more harm than 
the benefit it creates. 
There are several concerns associated with fracking. First, fracking requires huge amounts of water. Water 
transportation comes at a high environmental cost. Once mixed with fracking chemicals, water is unsuitable for human 
and animal consumption. Unfortunately, some of that contaminated water is returned to the water cycle. Second, the 
chemicals used in a fracking mix are potentially carcinogenic and may pollute groundwater near the extraction site 
(Colborn, Kwiatkowski, Schultz, and Bachran 2011; United States 2011). Industry leaders say that such contamination is 
unlikely, and that when it does occur, it is incidental and related to accidental human error rather than an expected risk 
11.1   Demography and Population  
11.2   Urbanization    
11.3   The Environment and Society 
 
Figure  11.1   A view from space makes it easy to see differences in population. Lighted areas are urban centers, 
containing larger and larger portions of the world’s population. Darker areas are sparsely populated. Beyond the global 
scale, the differences within regions is notable. Africa is mostly empty of lights with the exception of a few densely 
l t d
t th
th
t
d
th I di i
l
t l
l
tli
d b it li ht
h
i
t
k
t
t
ith

 
 
of the practice. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s study of fracking is ongoing (Environmental Protection 
Agency 2014). The third concern is that fracking causes minor earthquakes by undermining the seismic stability of an 
area, though far more induced earthquakes are caused by traditional oil and gas production (USGS n.d.) Finally, gas is 
not a renewable source of energy; this is a negative in the eyes of those who oppose continued reliance on fossil fuels. 
Fracking is not without its advantages. Its supporters offer statistics that suggest it reduces unemployment and 
contributes to economic growth (IHS Global Insights 2012). Since it allows energy companies access to previously 
nonviable and completely untapped oil and gas reserves, fracking boosts domestic oil production and lowers energy 
costs (IHS Global Insights 2012). Finally, since natural gas is a lower-emission fuel than coal, fracking reduces the 
airborne environmental impacts of industrial energy. 
As the discussion of fracking illustrates, there are important societal 
issues connected to the environment and how and where people 
live. Some sociologists examine these issues using a demography 
lens which is a subset of sociology that focuses on the study of 
population structure and population change. Environmental 
sociologists focus more specifically on the interactions between 
human societies and the natural environments. Today, we face 
pressing issues surrounding economic growth, population, 
migration, and our impact on the natural environment. The world’s 
population has added over a billion people since 2010. How many 
more people can our planet sustain? We generate more trash than 
ever, from Starbucks cups to obsolete cell phones containing toxic 
chemicals to food waste that could be composted. You may be 
unaware of where your trash ends up. And while this problem exists 
worldwide, trash issues are often more acute in urban areas. Cities 
and city living create new challenges for both society and the 
environment that make interactions between people and places of 
critical importance. 
How do sociologists study population and urbanization? Sociologists using a functionalist perspective might focus on the 
way all aspects of population, urbanization, and the environment serve as vital and cohesive elements, ensuring the 
continuing stability of society. They might study how the growth of the global population encourages emigration and 
immigration, and how emigration and immigration serve to strengthen ties between nations. Using a conflict 
perspective, sociologists would likely focus on forms of environmental inequality. For example, which parts of New 
Orleans society were the most responsive to the evacuation order during Hurricane Katrina? Which area was most 
affected by the flooding? And where (and in what conditions) were people from those areas housed, both during and 
before the evacuation? A sociologist using a symbolic interactionist perspective would likely study topics like the way 
family-planning information is presented to and understood by different population groups, the way people experience 
and understand urban life, and the language people use to convince others of the presence (or absence) of global 
climate change.  
11.1 Demography and Population 
Between 2011 and 2025, the number of people on earth increased from 7 to 8.2 billion. The rapidity with which this 
happened demonstrated an exponential increase from the time it took to grow from 5 billion to 6 billion people. 
However, the rate of growth of the global population is on the decline, with more recent population projections 
suggesting that the global population will stabilize and likely begin to decline in the 21st century. To properly 
understand these dynamics and make decisions regarding them, we turn to demography, or the study of populations. 
Three critical aspects of demography are fertility, mortality, and migration. 
 
Figure  11.2   This is a Marcellus shale gas-
drilling site in Lycoming County, Pennsylvania. 
(Credit: Nicholas A. Tonelli/flickr) 

 
 
Fertility is the most basic way populations grow – through children being born. The general fertility rate of a society 
equals the number of live births per 1000 women of childbearing age (15-44). Mortality, on the other hand, obviously 
removes people of all ages from the population. Just as fertility measures childbearing, the mortality rate is a measure 
of the number of people who die. The most common measure of mortality is the crude death rate that equals the 
Big Picture 
Mass Migration Crises 
At least once during each of the last three Presidential administrations, the United States has faced a crisis at its 
southern border. While images of children in crowded holding areas, covered in piles of shiny plastic emergency 
blankets, were often associated with the Trump Presidency, Presidents Obama and Biden saw children in the same 
conditions. The holding facilities, described as cages by some and often referred to as “perreras” (dog kennels) or 
“hieleras” (ice boxes) by the migrating people, are meant to be temporary stopovers while people await hearings or 
related refugee processes. But during several occasions, the number of people crossing the border was so large – 
including, at times, tens of thousands of children – that the system became overwhelmed. The conditions are 
deplorable. The outcomes are uncertain. But the people cross the border anyway. 
How did we get here? Bipartisan legislation passed in 2008 guarantees unaccompanied minors a hearing with an 
immigration judge where they may request asylum based on a “credible” fear of persecution or torture (U.S. 
Congress 2008). In some cases, these children are looking for relatives and can be placed with family while 
awaiting a hearing on their immigration status; in other cases, they become involved with the foster system or are 
placed in of the 170 housing facilities run by nonprofit or for-profit groups. Finally, for people who turn 18 while still 
in the process, they may be transferred to detention centers, sometimes on their birthday (Montoya-Galvez 2021). 
Many people in America were either accepting or unaware of these policies and situations until crises occurred in 
2014 and 2018-19. At those points of incredible influxes of migrant children, border control, refugee services, and 
advocacy organizations were overwhelmed by the surge. Both the Obama and Trump administrations pushed for 
changes in laws or guidelines for enforcement (Gomez 2014 and Kanno-Youngs 2020). 
The Obama administration sought to make the decision process faster. In 2014, over 50,000 unaccompanied 
minors were taken into custody, creating the backlog discussed above. Initially, the Trump administration sought to 
discourage immigration through policies such as separating parents and children who arrived together. After 
concerns about this were raised, President Trump reversed this policy.  While the situations at the border are 
extremely threatening to children's health and safety, people and policymakers in the United States are divided on 
how to address the situation. In many cases, these children are fleeing various kinds of violence and extreme 
poverty. The U.S. government has repeatedly indicated that the best way to avoid these crises is to address those 
conditions in the migrants' home countries. But even with financial aid for those nations and pressure on their 
governments to crack down on illegal activity, it is unlikely that the situation will change quickly or consistently. 

 
 
number of deaths per 1,000 people per year. When analyzed together, fertility and mortality rates help researchers 
understand the overall growth occurring in a population. 
Another critical element to understanding how populations change is the movement of people into and out of an area. 
Migration includes both immigration, which describes movement into an area to take up permanent residence, and 
emigration, which refers to the movement out of an area to another place of permanent residence. Migration might be 
voluntary (like when college students go to another country to earn a degree) or involuntary (as when Syrians evacuate 
war-torn areas).  
Population Growth 
The social forces of fertility, mortality, and migration all work together to determine the shape and composition of a 
society’s population. Demographers pay special attention to the number of people in different age groups over time. 
Population composition projections tell compelling stories about 
societal changes and what to expect in the future. Of particular interest 
to demographers are the number of people who are likely to be in the 
labor force (ages 25-64) versus those who are not likely to be in the 
labor force (children and those likely to be retired from the labor force). 
The population composition provides insights about potential economic 
capability of a population and potential childcare and caregiving needs 
of a population based on chronological age. Of course, chronological 
age does not provide information about the health or capacity to of a 
 
Figure 11.4  Population Pyramids with the number of men and women by age group in the United States in 1980 
and 2020 (Source: US Census (https://www.census.gov/library/visualizations/interactive/age-sex-pyramid-for-the-
united-states.html) (Retrieved November, 2025).  
 
Figure  11.3   This picture provides an 
image of dozens of children in plastic-
lined holding areas from 2021, which 
was one of a group of photos that 
sparked a public outcry in the early days 
of the Biden administration (Credit: 
Defense Visual Information Distribution 
Service) 

 
 
population to participate in the labor force, but it does offer useful trends that can provide insights that can be used to 
guide policy making.  
In the United States, the composition of the population has changed significantly over time. One way that demographers 
evaluate changes in the composition of the population is using a tool called a population pyramid. A population pyramid 
provides the total number of men and women by age in the population in stacked bars, and as the composition of the 
population changes, the shape of the pyramid changes. A population that has mostly young people and very few older 
people will have a population pyramid that is shaped like a triangle, whereas a population that has a lot of older people 
will have a population pyramid that is shaped more like a rectangle. Figure 11.4 shows population pyramids provided by 
the United States Census, which shows the 1980 and the 2020 population. In looking at the two side by side, it is 
possible to see a significant shift in the shape of the population. 
Another way to look at the population is to 
evaluate the population in different age groups 
over time. Figure 11.5 shows how the population 
has grown in the United States since 1950, and 
that the proportion of the population in different 
age groups has changed over time. On the one 
hand, the total number of children under 5 has not 
changed since 1950 even though the overall 
population as more than doubled. On the other 
hand, the size of the age 25-64 age population has 
grown dramatically, as has the age 65+ 
population. The result is a very different 
composition of the population today than in the 
past. 
Demographers also predict future population 
growth based on patterns of fertility, mortality, and 
migration in particular geographic areas. Demographic methods make it possible to make predictions about the size 
and composition of the population. Figure 11.6 shows 
the United States population extending to 2100. This 
makes it possible to get a sense about what we can 
expect over the next five decades or so given the 
number of people currently alive and their ages and 
life expectancies as well as current and predicted 
fertility rates. These projections show that the age 
group that will increase the most in the next 50+ 
years will be the population age 65+ population 
while the size of the under age 25 population will 
be stable during this same period and only very 
small increases in the age 25-64 population.  
 
Figure 11.6   Age structure of the population in the United States over 
time (Source: Our World in Data (https://ourworldindata.org/age-
structure) (retrieved November, 2025). 
 
Figure 11.7  Number of babies per woman by region over time 
(Source: Our World in Data (https://ourworldindata.org/global-
decline-fertility-rate) (retrieved November, 2025). 
 
 
Figure 11.5  United States population by age group since 1950. 
(Source: Our World in Data (https://ourworldindata.org/age-
structure) (retrieved November, 2025). 

 
 
The primary reason for the stable under age 25 population is related to low and stable fertility rates. One way that 
demographers measure fertility rates is based on the number of children per woman. In a population, the size will stay 
stable if, on average, there are 2.1 children born to each women. A fertility rate that goes below 2.1 will result in a 
decline in the overall size of the population and a rate above 2.1 will result in an increase in the size of the population if 
mortality rates remain stable and low, as is the case in most countries worldwide. Figure 11.7 shows the fertility rates 
across various continents over time, with most converging below 2.1 except for Africa where fertility rates are 
approximately 4 children per woman though rapidly declining over time.  
A key factor contributing to changing population composition is related to survival. When many people do not survive 
into adulthood and later life, the population does not grow as rapidly, but when life expectancy increases while fertility 
rates remain low and stable, the population continues to increase in size as people already born get older. Life 
expectancy at birth, meaning the expected number of years a person is expected to live at the time they are born, has 
increased over time, with COVID-19 causing a brief 
but significant dip in 2020-2022 but has largely 
returned to the pre-COVID-19 trends worldwide, as 
shown in Figure 11.8. In 2023, life expectancy at 
birth worldwide was 73.2 and in the United States, 
babies born in 2023 were expected to live 79.3 
years and in Europe, 79.1 years.  
Demographic Theories 
To understand these populations trends, 
demographers have evaluated human behaviors, 
leading different theories about how populations 
change. The next section describes four theories 
about population that have informed sociological 
thought over the last century: Malthusian, zero 
population growth, cornucopian, and demographic 
transition theories. 
Malthusian Theory 
Thomas Malthus (1766–1834) was an English clergyman who made dire predictions about earth’s ability to sustain its 
growing population. According to Malthusian theory, three factors would control human population that exceeded the 
earth’s carrying capacity, or how many people can live in a given area considering the amount of available resources: 
war, famine, and disease (Malthus 1798). He termed them “positive checks” because they increase mortality rates, thus 
keeping the population in check. They are countered by “preventive checks,” which also control the population but by 
reducing fertility rates; preventive checks include birth control and celibacy. Thinking practically, Malthus saw that 
people could produce only so much food in a given year, yet the population was increasing at an exponential rate. 
Eventually, he thought people would run out of food and begin to starve. They would go to war over increasingly scarce 
resources and reduce the population to a manageable level, and then the cycle would begin anew. 
Of course, this has not exactly happened. The human population has continued to grow long past Malthus’s predictions. 
So, what happened? Why didn’t we die off? There are three reasons sociologists believe we are continuing to expand the 
population of our planet. First, technological increases in food production have increased both the amount and quality of 
calories we can produce per person. Second, human ingenuity has developed new medicine to curtail death from 
disease. Finally, the development and widespread use of contraception and other forms of family planning have 
decreased the speed at which our population increases. But what about the future? Some still believe Malthus was 
correct and that ample resources to support the earth’s population will soon run out. 
 
Figure 11.8  Life expectancy at birth over time by geographic area. 
Source: Our World in Data (https://ourworldindata.org/life-
expectancy) (retrieved November, 2025). 

 
 
Zero Population Growth 
A neo-Malthusian researcher named Paul Ehrlich brought Malthus’s predictions into the twentieth century. However, 
according to Ehrlich, it is the environment, not specifically the food supply, that will play a crucial role in the continued 
health of the planet’s population (Ehrlich 1968). Ehrlich's ideas suggest that the human population is moving rapidly 
toward complete environmental collapse, as people use up or pollute finite resources such as water and air. He 
advocated for a goal of zero population growth (ZPG), in which the number of people entering a population through birth 
or immigration is equal to the number of people leaving it via death or emigration. While support for this concept is 
mixed, it is still considered a possible solution to global overpopulation. 
Cornucopian Theory 
Of course, some theories are less focused on the pessimistic hypothesis that the world’s population will meet a 
detrimental challenge to sustaining itself. Cornucopian theory scoffs at the idea of humans wiping themselves out; it 
asserts that human ingenuity can resolve any environmental or social issues that develop. As an example, it points to 
the issue of food supply. If we need more food, the theory contends, agricultural scientists will figure out how to grow it, 
as they have been doing for centuries. After all, in this perspective, human ingenuity has been up to the task for 
thousands of years and there is no reason for that pattern not to continue (Simon 1981). 
Demographic Transition Theory 
Whether you believe that we are headed for environmental disaster and the end of human existence as we know it, or 
you think people will always adapt to changing circumstances, we can see clear patterns in population growth. Societies 
develop along a predictable continuum as they evolve from unindustrialized to postindustrial. Demographic transition 
theory (Caldwell and Caldwell 2006) suggests that future population growth will develop along a predictable four-stage 
model.  
Figure 11.9 shows the phases of the 
demographic transition. In Stage 1, 
birth, death, and infant mortality rates 
are all high, while life expectancy is 
short. An example of this stage is the 
1800s in the United States. As 
countries begin to industrialize, they 
enter Stage 2, where birth rates are 
higher while infant mortality and the 
death rates drop. Life expectancy also 
increases. Afghanistan is currently in 
this stage. Stage 3 occurs once a 
society is thoroughly industrialized; 
birth rates decline, while life 
expectancy continues to increase. 
Death rates continue to decrease. 
Mexico’s population is at this stage. In 
the final phase, Stage 4, we see the 
postindustrial era of a society. Birth 
and death rates are low, people are 
healthier and live longer, and society 
enters a phase of population stability. 
Overall population may even decline. 
For example, Sweden is considered to 
be in Stage 4.  
 
Figure 11.9  The Demographic Transition theory and related population 
patterns (Source: Our World in Data 
(https://ourworldindata.org/demographic-transition) (Accessed November, 
2025). 

 
 
The United Nations Population Fund (2008) categorizes nations as high fertility, intermediate fertility, or low fertility. The 
United Nations (UN) anticipates that population growth in high-fertility countries (mostly in sub-Saharan Africa) will triple 
between 2011 and 2100. For countries with intermediate fertility rates (the United States, India, and Mexico all fall into 
this category), growth is expected to be about 26 percent. And low-fertility countries like China, Australia, and most of 
Europe will actually see population declines of approximately 20 percent. Figure 11.10 shows these trends. 
 
Changes in U.S. Immigration Patterns and Attitudes 
Worldwide patterns of migration have changed, though the United States remains the most popular destination. From 
1990 to 2013, the number of migrants living in the United States increased from one in six to one in five (The Pew 
Research Center 2013). Overall, the United States is home to more than 50 million foreign-born people, while only 
about 5 million U.S. citizens live abroad, according to latest figures. Of foreign-born citizens emigrating to the United 
States, 55 percent originated in Latin America and the Caribbean. However, over the past few years, more people from 
Asian countries have entered than from Latin American ones (Budiman 2020).  
While there are more foreign-born people residing in the United States legally, as of 2017 about 10.5 million resided 
here without legal status (Budiman 2020). Most immigrants in the U.S. live in either Texas, Florida, or California. Even 
before policy changes and COVID-19 affected refugee admittance, a relatively small number of people formally entered 
the country as refugees. In 2016, about 85,000 refugees were admitted to the U.S. (of over one million total 
immigrants), with the largest portion arriving from the Democratic Republic of Congo. In 2020, the number of refugees 
was reduced to 18,000, and these numbers continue to fluctuate over time across different presidential administrations 
and in response to new geopolitical crises.  
 
Figure 11.10    Population proportions worldwide. Source: Our World in Data 
(https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/population-regions-with-projections) (retrieved November, 2025). 

 
 
11.2   Urbanization 
A core question in sociology dating back to its 
origins as a discipline is how human behavior 
and interpersonal relationships are 
fundamentally altered when populations 
transition from rural to urban environments. 
This shift is called urbanization, a process 
spurred on by industrialization. The expansion 
of the global economy, migration, and internal 
changes like gentrification continue to shape 
urban growth. In highly developed countries, 
urban populations now exceed 55 percent 
globally, and there are more than 30 
“megacities” on the planet. As cities continue 
to expand, one challenge is to promote 
sustainable development that avoids 
environmental harm.  
The Growth of Cities 
According to sociologist Gideon Sjoberg (1965), there are three prerequisites for the development of a city: First, good 
environment with fresh water and a favorable climate; second, advanced technology, which will produce a food surplus 
to support nonfarmers; and third, strong social organization to ensure social stability and a stable economy. Most 
scholars agree that the first cities were developed somewhere in ancient Mesopotamia, though there are disagreements 
about exactly where. Most early cities were small by today’s standards, and the largest was most likely Rome, with 
about 650,000 inhabitants (Chandler and Fox 1974). The factors limiting the size of ancient cities included lack of 
adequate sewage control, limited food supply, and immigration restrictions. Today, the primary influence on cities’ 
growth is economic forces. Since the recent economic recession reduced housing prices, researchers have been waiting 
to see what happens to urban migration patterns in response. 
Urbanization in the United States 
Urbanization in the United States proceeded rapidly during the Industrial Era. As more and more opportunities for work 
appeared in factories, workers left farms (and the rural communities that housed them) to move to the cities. From mill 
towns in Massachusetts to tenements in New York, the industrial era saw an influx of poor workers into U.S. cities. At 
 
Figure 11.11   The lights of New York City are an iconic image of city 
life. (Credit: Jauher Ali Nasir/flickr) 

 
 
various times throughout the country’s history, 
certain demographic groups, from post-Civil War 
southern Black people to more recent immigrants, 
have made their way to urban centers to seek a 
better life in the city. 
Suburbs and Exurbs 
As cities grew more crowded, and often more 
impoverished and costly, more and more people 
began to migrate back out of them. But instead of 
returning to rural small towns (like they’d resided 
in before moving to the city), these people needed 
close access to the cities for their jobs. In the 
1850s, as the urban population greatly expanded 
and transportation options improved, suburbs 
developed. Suburbs are the communities 
surrounding cities, typically close enough for 
commuting, but far enough away to allow for more 
space than city living affords. The bucolic 
suburban landscape of the early twentieth 
century has largely disappeared due to the 
growth of suburbs and city sprawl that 
leads to new problems. Suburban sprawl 
contributes to traffic congestion, which in 
turn contributes to commuting time. And 
commuting times and distances have 
continued to increase as new suburbs 
developed farther and farther from city 
centers. Simultaneously, this dynamic 
increased natural resource use and 
pollution in the form of carbon emissions. 
As the suburbs became more crowded and 
lost their charm, those who could afford it 
turned to the exurbs, communities that 
exist outside the ring of suburbs and are typically populated by even wealthier families who want more space and have 
the resources to lengthen their commute. Together, the suburbs, exurbs, and metropolitan areas all combine to form a 
metropolis. New York was the first U.S. megalopolis, a huge urban corridor encompassing multiple cities and their 
Suburbs Are Not All White Picket Fences: The Banlieues of Paris 
What makes a suburb a suburb? Simply, a suburb is a community surrounding a city. But when you picture a 
suburb in your mind, your image may vary widely depending on which nation you call home. In the United States, 
most consider the suburbs home to upper— and middle—class people with private homes. In other countries, like 
France, the suburbs, or “banlieues,” are synonymous with housing projects and impoverished communities. In fact, 
the banlieues of Paris are notorious for their ethnic violence and crime, with higher unemployment and more 
residents living in poverty than in the city center. Further, the banlieues have a much higher immigrant population, 
which in Paris is mostly Arabic and African immigrants. This contradicts the clichéd U.S. image of a typical white-
picket-fence suburb. 
 
Figure 11.13   The sprawl in Los Angeles means long commutes and 
traffic congestion. (Credit: Doc Searles/flickr) 
 
Figure 11.12   Percent of U.S. Population. As this chart illustrates, 
the shift from rural to urban living in the United States has been 
dramatic and continuous. (Credit: the U.S. Census Bureau) 
 

 
 
surrounding suburbs. These metropolises use vast quantities of natural resources and are a growing part of the U.S. 
landscape. 
Urbanization around the World 
During the Industrial Era, there was a growth spurt worldwide. The development of factories brought people from rural to 
urban areas, and new technology increased the efficiency of transportation, food production, and food preservation. For 
example, from the mid-1670s to the early 1900s, London's population increased from 550,000 to 7 million (Old Bailey 
Proceedings Online 2011). Global favorites like New York, London, and Tokyo are all examples of postindustrial 
megacities. As cities evolve from manufacturing-based industrial to service- and information-based postindustrial 
societies, gentrification becomes more common. Gentrification occurs when members of the middle and upper classes 
enter and renovate city areas that have been historically less affluent while the poor urban underclass are forced by 
resulting price pressures to leave those neighborhoods for increasingly decaying portions of the city. 
Globally, 55 percent of the world’s people currently 
reside in urban areas, with the most urbanized region 
being North America (82 percent), followed by Latin 
America/the Caribbean (81 percent), with Europe 
coming in third (74 percent). In comparison, Africa is 
only 40 percent urbanized, though one of its nations, 
Nigeria, is projected to significantly urbanize in the 
coming years. With 37 million people, Tokyo is the 
world’s largest city by population, and New Delhi is the 
second largest with 29 million. The world’s most 
densely populated cities are now largely concentrated 
in the global south, a marked change from several 
decades ago when the biggest cities were found in the 
global north. In the next forty years, the biggest global 
challenge for urbanized populations, particularly in less 
developed countries, will be to achieve development 
that occurs without depleting or damaging the natural 
environment, also called sustainable development 
(United Nations 2018).  
11.3   The Environment and Society 
The subfield of environmental sociology studies the way humans interact with their environments. This is an area that is 
garnering more attention as extreme weather patterns and policy battles over climate change dominate the news. A key 
factor of environmental sociology is the concept of carrying capacity, which describes the maximum amount of life that 
can be sustained within a given area. While this concept can refer to grazing lands or to rivers, we can also apply it to 
the earth as a whole. 
Climate Change 
While you might be more familiar with the phrase “global warming,” climate change is the term now used to refer to 
long-term shifts in temperatures due to human activity and, in particular, the release of greenhouse gases into the 
environment. Climate change is a deeply controversial subject in the U.S., with NASA scientists concluding that there is 
“unequivocal evidence that Earth is warming at an unprecedented rate” (https://science.nasa.gov/climate-
change/evidence/). Despite robust scientific evidence, Americans remain divided on the causes of climate change, how 
much climate change impacts communities, and the what the best policies are to address climate change (Kennedy & 
Tyson, 2024). Historically, core nations (like the United States and Western Europe) were the greatest source of 
greenhouse gases, they have now evolved into postindustrial societies and produce much lower greenhouse gases than 
in the past. Industrialized semi-peripheral and peripheral nations are releasing ever increasing quantities of greenhouse 
 
Figure 11.14   Too little land for grazing means starving 
cattle. (Credit: newbeatphoto/flickr) 

 
 
gases, such as carbon dioxide. The core nations, now post-industrial and less dependent on greenhouse-gas-causing 
industries. Some of the core nations now wish to enact strict protocols regarding what is believed to be the causes of 
global warming, but some of the semi-peripheral and peripheral nations oppose these restrictions claiming they want 
the same lower cost economic chance to evolve their economies.  
Pollution 
Pollution describes what happens when contaminants are introduced into an environment (water, air, land) at levels 
that are damaging. Environments can often sustain a limited amount of contaminants without marked change, and 
water, air, and soil can “heal” themselves to a certain degree. However, once contaminant levels reach a certain point, 
the results can be catastrophic. 
Water 
Typhoid, cholera, and diarrhea from unsafe water kill hundreds of thousands of children each year, and over 160 million 
children suffer from malnutrition and growth issues due to water issues. An estimated 3 billion people do not have 
access to clean water at home for hand-washing (CDC 2016). Consider the impact of that, knowing that many of those 
without water for hand-washing live in agricultural societies in which they work with animals or live in cities with many 
other people. 
The cost of obtaining clean water can interfere with other important aspects of survival and social mobility. Children 
serve as water haulers, traveling long distances on foot to collect potable water for their family. Those same children (as 
well as those who similarly collect firewood) are less able to focus on their education, either missing school or not 
completing the associated work (Water.org 2021). Regular water hauling–which for some people involves carrying 20 
kilograms (40 pounds) for 30 minutes or more–also has negative effects on people's bodies, especially pregnant 
Big Picture 
The Tragedy of the Commons 
You might have heard the expression “the tragedy of the commons.” In 1968, an article of the same title written by 
Garrett Hardin described how a common pasture was ruined by overgrazing. But Hardin was not the first to notice the 
phenomenon. Back in the 1800s, Oxford economist William Forster Lloyd looked at the devastated public grazing 
commons and the unhealthy cattle subject to such limited resources, and saw, in essence, that the carrying capacity 
of the commons had been exceeded. However, since no one was held responsible for the land (as it was open to all), 
no one was willing to make sacrifices to improve it. Cattle grazers benefitted from adding more cattle to their herds, 
but they did not have to take on the responsibility of the lands that were being damaged by overgrazing. So there 
was an incentive for them to add more head of cattle, and no incentive for restraint. 
Satellite photos of Africa taken in the 1970s showed this practice to dramatic effect. The images depicted a dark 
irregular area of more than 300 square miles. There was a large, fenced area, where plenty of grass was growing. 
Outside the fence, the ground was bare and devastated. The reason was simple: the fenced land was privately owned 
by informed farmers who carefully rotated their grazing animals and allowed the fields to lie fallow periodically. 
Outside the fence was land used by nomads. Like the herdsmen in 1800s Oxford, the nomads increased their heads 
of cattle without planning for its impact on the greater good. The soil eroded, the plants died, then the cattle died, 
and, ultimately, some of the people died. 
How does this lesson affect those of us who don’t need to graze our cattle? Well, like the cows, we all need food, 
water, and clean air to survive. With the increasing world population and the ever-larger megalopolises with tens of 
millions of people, the limit of the earth’s carrying capacity is called into question. When too many take while giving 
too little thought to the rest of the population, whether cattle or humans, the result is usually tragedy. 

 
 
women who often undertake the task. The situation is only getting more dire as the global population increases. Water 
is a key resource battleground in the twenty-first century. 
As every child learns in school, 70 percent of earth is made of water. Despite that figure, there is a finite amount of 
water usable by humans and it is constantly used and reused in a sustainable water cycle. The way we use this 
abundant natural resource, however, renders much of it unsuitable for consumption and unable to sustain life. Oil and 
natural gas production, discussed at the beginning of the chapter, require so much water that there's no safe place to 
put the wastewater other than deep underground. But more common activities use far more water than many people 
understand. The immense amount of water to produce almonds (8 percent of California's water supply, equating to 
roughly one gallon per individual almond) has made headlines, as have the 37 gallons that it takes to produce a cup of 
coffee. But all crops and livestock have a "water footprint." Dairy milk takes more water to produce than does almond 
milk, for example (WaterCalculuator.org 2020). 
Water pollution has always been a byproduct of industrialization, increased population, and urbanization. Cleveland's 
Cuyahoga River caught fire several times in the 20th century, due to pollution, and the 1969 fire was part of what 
inspired the United States' turn to cleaner water. Other countries are currently undergoing the same crises. As a 
consequence of population concentrations, water close to human settlements is frequently polluted with untreated or 
partially treated human waste (sewage), chemicals, radioactivity, and levels of heat sufficient to create large “dead 
zones” incapable of supporting aquatic life.  
Soil Erosion 
You might have read The Grapes of Wrath in English class at some point in time. Steinbeck’s tale of the Joads, driven 
out of their home by the Dust Bowl, is still playing out today. In China, as in Depression-era Oklahoma, over-tilling soil to 
expand agriculture has resulted in the disappearance of large patches of topsoil. 
Soil erosion and desertification are just two of the many forms of soil pollution. In addition, all the chemicals and 
pollutants that harm our water supplies can also leach into soil with similar effects. Brown zones where nothing can 
grow are common results of soil pollution. One demand that global population growth makes on the planet is a 
requirement for more food to be produced. The so-called “Green Revolution” in the 1960s saw chemists and world aid 
organizations working together to bring modern farming methods, complete with pesticides, to developing countries. 
The immediate result was positive: food yields went up and burgeoning populations were fed. But as time has gone on, 
these areas have fallen into even more difficult straits as the damage done by modern methods leave traditional 
farmers with less than they had to start. 
Dredging certain beaches in an attempt to save valuable beachfront property from coastal erosion has resulted in 
greater storm impact on shorelines, and damage to beach ecosystems (Turneffe Atoll Trust 2008). These dredging 
projects have damaged reefs, sea grass beds, and shorelines and can kill off large swaths of marine life. Ultimately, this 
damage threatens local fisheries, tourism, and other parts of the local economy. 

 
 
Garbage 
Where is your last cell phone? What about the one 
before that? Or the huge old television set your family 
had before flat screens became popular? For most of 
us, the answer is a sheepish shrug. We don’t pay 
attention to the demise of old items, and since 
electronics drop in price and increase in innovation at 
an incredible clip, we have been trained by their 
manufacturers to upgrade frequently. 
Garbage creation and control are major issues for 
most core and industrializing nations, and it is quickly 
becoming one of the most critical environmental 
issues faced in the United States. People in the 
United States buy products, use them, and then throw 
them away. Did you dispose of your old electronics 
according to government safety guidelines? Chances 
are good you didn’t even know there are guidelines. 
Multiply your electronics times a few million, take into account the numerous toxic chemicals they contain, and then 
imagine either burying those chemicals in the ground or lighting them on fire. 
Those are the two primary means of waste disposal 
in the United States: landfill and incineration. When 
it comes to getting rid of dangerous toxins, neither is 
a good choice. Styrofoam and plastics that many of 
us use every day do not dissolve in a natural way. 
Burn them, and they release carcinogens into the air. 
Their improper incineration (intentional or not) adds 
to air pollution and increases smog. Dump them in 
landfills, and they do not decompose. As landfill sites 
fill up, we risk an increase in groundwater 
contamination. 
Air  
China’s fast-growing economy and burgeoning 
industry have translated into notoriously poor air 
quality. Smog hangs heavily over the major cities, 
sometimes grounding aircraft that cannot navigate 
through it. Pedestrians and cyclists wear air-filter masks to protect themselves. In Beijing, citizens are skeptical that the 
government-issued daily pollution ratings are trustworthy. Increasingly, they are taking their own pollution 
measurements in the hopes that accurate information will galvanize others to action. Given that some days they can 
barely see down the street, they hope action comes soon (Papenfuss 2011). 
Humanity, with its growing numbers, use of fossil fuels, and increasingly urbanized society, is putting too much stress on 
the earth’s atmosphere. The amount of air pollution varies from locale to locale, and you may be more personally 
affected than you realize. How often do you check air quality reports before leaving your house? Depending on where 
you live, this question can sound utterly strange or like an everyday matter. Along with oxygen, most of the time we are 
also breathing in soot, hydrocarbons, carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur oxides. 
 
Figure 11.15   Where should garbage go when you’ve run out 
of room? This is a question that is increasingly pressing the 
planet. (Credit: Department of Environmental Protection 
Recycling/flickr) 
 
Figure 11.16   An aerial view of the Gulf Coast, taken in May 
2010, illustrates the damage done by the BP Deep Water 
Horizon spill. (Credit: Jeff Warren/flickr) 

 
 
Toxic and Radioactive Waste  
Radioactivity is a form of air pollution. While nuclear 
energy promises a safe and abundant power source, 
use of nuclear power is not without its difficulties. We 
accumulate nuclear waste, which we must then keep 
track of long term and ultimately figure out how to 
store the toxic waste material without damaging the 
environment or putting future generations at risk. 
The 2011 earthquake in Japan illustrates the dangers 
of even safe, government-monitored nuclear energy. 
When disaster occurs, how can we safely evacuate the 
large numbers of affected people? Indeed, how can we 
even be sure how far the evacuation radius should 
extend? Radiation can also enter the food chain, 
causing damage from the bottom (phytoplankton and 
microscopic soil organisms) all the way to the top. Once 
again, the price paid for cheap power is much greater 
than what we see on the electric bill. 
The enormous oil disaster that hit the Louisiana Gulf Coast in 2010 is just one of a number of environmental crises that 
have led to toxic residue. They include the pollution of the Love Canal neighborhood of the 1970s to the Exxon Valdez oil 
tanker crash of 1989, the Chernobyl disaster of 1986, and Japan’s Fukushima nuclear plant incident following the 
earthquake in 2011. Often, the stories are not newsmakers, but simply an unpleasant part of life for the people who live 
near toxic sites such as Centralia, Pennsylvania and Hinkley, California. In many cases, people in these neighborhoods 
can be part of a cancer cluster without realizing the cause. Sociologists, social epidemiologists, environmental 
scientists, and other scientists all participate in the collective task of identifying environmental hazards, in 
understanding their sources, and in identifying the most efficacious, research-grounded responses to them.  
Sociology in the Real World 
The Fire Burns On: Centralia, Pennsylvania 
There used to be a place called Centralia, Pennsylvania. The town incorporated in the 1860s and once had several 
thousand residents, largely coal workers. But the story of its demise begins a century later in 1962. That year, a 
trash-burning fire was lit in the pit of the old, abandoned coal mine outside of town. The fire moved down the 
mineshaft and ignited a vein of coal. It is still burning. 
For more than twenty years, people tried to extinguish the underground fire, but no matter what they did, it 
returned. There was little government action, and people had to abandon their homes as toxic gases engulfed the 
area and sinkholes developed. The situation drew national attention when the ground collapsed under twelve-year-
old Todd Domboski in 1981. Todd was in his yard when a sinkhole four feet wide and 150 feet deep opened 
beneath him. He clung to exposed tree roots and saved his life; if he had fallen a few feet farther, the heat or 
carbon monoxide would have killed him. 
In 1983, engineers studying the fire concluded that it could burn for another century or more and could spread over 
nearly 4,000 acres. At this point, the government offered to buy out the town’s residents and wanted them to 
relocate to nearby towns. A few determined Centralians refused to leave, even though the government bought their 
homes, and they are the only ones who remain. In one field, signs warn people to enter at their own risk, because 
the ground is hot and unstable. And the fire burns on (DeKok 1986). 
 
Figure  11.17   Oil on the gulf shore beaches caused 
great destruction, killing marine and land animals and 
devastating local business. (Credit: AV8ter/flickr) 

 
 
 
Key Terms 
sustainable development: development that occurs without depleting or damaging the natural environment 
asylum-seekers: those whose claim to refugee status have not been validated 
cancer cluster: a geographic area with high levels of cancer within its population 
carrying capacity: the amount of people that can live in a given area considering the amount of available resources 
climate change: long-term shifts in temperature and climate due to human activity 
concentric zone model: a model of human ecology that views cities as a series of circular rings or zones 
cornucopian theory: a theory concentric zone model that asserts human ingenuity will rise to the challenge of providing 
adequate resources for a growing population 
demographic transition theory: a theory that describes four stages of population growth, following patterns that connect 
birth and death rates with stages of industrial development 
demography: the study of population 
environmental racism: the burdening of economically and socially disadvantaged communities with a disproportionate 
share of environmental hazards 
environmental sociology: the sociological subfield that addresses the relationship between humans and the 
environment 
exurbs: communities that arise farther out than the suburbs and are typically populated by residents of high 
socioeconomic status 
fertility rate: a measure noting the actual number of children born 
fracking: hydraulic fracturing, a method used to recover gas and oil from shale by drilling down into the earth and 
directing a high-pressure mixture of water, sand, and proprietary chemicals into the rock 
gentrification: the entry of upper- and middle-class residents to city areas or communities that have been historically 
less affluent 
human ecology: a functional perspective that looks at the relationship between people and their built and natural 
environment 
Malthusian theory: a theory asserting that population is controlled through positive checks (war, famine, disease) and 
preventive checks (measures to reduce fertility) 
megalopolis: a large urban corridor that encompasses several cities and their surrounding suburbs and exurbs 
metropolis: the area that includes a city and its suburbs and exurbs 
mortality rate: measure of the number of people in a population who die 
pollution: the introduction of contaminants into an environment at levels that are damaging 
population composition: a snapshot of the demographic profile of a population based on fertility, mortality, and 
migration rates 
population pyramid: a graphic representation that depicts population distribution according to age and sex 

 
 
refugee: an individual who has been forced to leave their country in order to escape war, persecution, or natural disaster 
suburbs: the communities surrounding cities, typically close enough for a daily commute 
urbanization: the study of the social, political, and economic relationships of cities 
zero population growth: a theoretical goal in which the number of people entering a population through birth or 
immigration is equal to the number of people leaving it via death or emigration 
 
References 
Introduction 
Colborn, Theo, Carol Kwiatkowski, Kim Schultz, and Mary Bachran. 2011. “Natural Gas Operations from a Public Health 
Perspective.” Human & Ecological Risk Assessment 17 (5): 1039-1056. 
Environmental Protection Agency. 2014. “EPA’s Study of Hydraulic Fracturing and Its Potential Impact on Drinking 
Water Resources.” U.S. EPA, September 14. Retrieved October 29, 2014. (http://www2.epa.gov/hfstudy). 
Henry, Terrence. 2012. “How Fracking Disposal Wells Are Causing Earthquakes in Dallas-Fort Worth.” Texas RSS. N.p., 
August 6. Retrieved October 29, 2014 (http://stateimpact.npr.org/texas/2012/08/06/how-fracking-disposal-
wells-are-causing-earthquakes-in-dallas-fort-worth/). 
IHS Global Insights. 2012. “The Economic and Employment Contributions of Unconventional Gas Development in State 
Economies.” Prepared for America’s Natural Gas Alliance, June 2012. Retrieved October 29, 2014 
(http://www.anga.us/media/content/F7D4500D-DD3A-1073-
DA3480BE3CA41595/files/state_unconv_gas_economic_contribution.pdf). 
Money Illusion. 2016. “Coal jobs were lost to automation, not trade.” TheMoneyIllusion.com. December 21 2016. 
(https://www.themoneyillusion.com/coal-jobs-were-lost-to-automation-not-trade/) 
USGS. “Does Fracking Cause Earthquakes.” United States Geological Survey. Retrieved April 1, 2021. 
(https://www.usgs.gov/faqs/does-fracking-cause-earthquakes) 
Vavra, Shannon. 2017. “Mining By Machine: Automation Hits Coal Industry.” June 29 2017. 
(https://www.axios.com/mining-by-machine-automation-hits-coal-industry-1513303325-ba4cf237-d636-4987-
88fc-0b277410fa79.html) 
11.1   Demography and Population 
Budiman, Abby. 2020. “Key Findings About US Immigrants.” Pew Research Center. August 20, 2020. 
(https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/08/20/key-findings-about-u-s-immigrants/) 
Caldwell, John Charles and Bruce Caldwell. 2006. Demographic Transition Theory. The Netherlands: Springer. 
CIA World Factbook. 2014. “Guide to Country Comparisons.” Central Intelligence Agency World Factbook. Retrieved 
October 31, 2014 (https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/rankorder/rankorderguide.html). 
Colborn, Theo, Carol Kwiatkowski, Kim Schultz, and Mary Bachran. 2011. “Natural Gas Operations from a Public Health 
Perspective.” Human & Ecological Risk Assessment. 17 (5): 1039-1056 
Connor, Phillip, D'Vera Cohn, and Ana Gonzalez-Barrera. 2013. “Changing Patterns of Global Migration and 
Remittances.” Pew Research Centers Social Demographic Trends Project RSS. N.p., Retrieved October 31, 2014 
(http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/12/17/changing-patterns-of-global-migration-and-remittances/). 

 
 
Dart, Tom. 2014. "Child Migrants at Texas Border: An Immigration Crisis That's Hardly New." The Guardian [Houston]. 
www.theguardian.com. Guardian News and Media Limited. Retrieved October 30, 2014 
(http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/09/us-immigration-undocumented-children-texas). 
Ehrlich, Paul R. 1968. The Population Bomb. New York: Ballantine. 
Environmental Protection Agency. 2014. "EPA's Study of Hydraulic Fracturing and Its Potential Impact on Drinking 
Water Resources." U.S. EPA, September 14. Retrieved October 29, 2014. (http://www2.epa.gov/hfstudy). 
Fox News, and Associated Press. 2014. "Protests Turn Back Buses Carrying Illegal Immigrant Children." Fox News. FOX 
News Network. Retrieved October 30, 2014 (http://www.foxnews.com/us/2014/07/02/protests-force-buses-
carrying-illegal-immigrant-children-to-be-rerouted/). 
Gomez, Alan. 2014. "Obama Seeks Change to Law That Protects Immigrant Kids." USA Today. July 2 2014. 
(https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/07/02/immigration-obama-deportation-children-
border/11915723/) 
Henry, Terrence. 2012. "How Fracking Disposal Wells Are Causing Earthquakes in Dallas-Fort Worth." Texas RSS. N.p., 
August 6. Retrieved October 29, 2014 (http://stateimpact.npr.org/texas/2012/08/06/how-fracking-disposal-
wells-are-causing-earthquakes-in-dallas-fort-worth/). 
IHS Global Insights. 2012. "The Economic and Employment Contributions of Unconventional Gas Development in State 
Economies." Prepared for America's Natural Gas Alliance, June 2012. Retrieved October 29, 2014. 
(http://www.anga.us/media/content/F7D4500D-DD3A-1073-
DA3480BE3CA41595/files/state_unconv_gas_economic_contribution.pdf). 
Kanno-Youngs, Zolan and Maggie Haberman. 2020. “Trump Administration Moves to Solidify Restrictive Immigration 
Policies.” New York Times, June 12, 2020. 
Malthus, Thomas R. 1965 [1798]. An Essay on Population. New York: Augustus Kelley. 
Montoya-Galvez, Camilo. 2021. "The Facts About How The US Processes Unaccompanied Migrant Children At The 
Border." CBS News. February 25 2021. (https://www.cbsnews.com/news/unaccompanied-migrant-children-
united-states-processing-housing/) 
Passel, Jeffrey, D'Vera Cohn, and Ana Gonzalez-Barrera. 2013. "Population Decline of Unauthorized Immigrants Stalls, 
May Have Reversed." Pew Research Centers Hispanic Trends Project RSS. N.p., Retrieved October 31, 2014 
(http://www.pewhispanic.org/2013/09/23/population-decline-of-unauthorized-immigrants-stalls-may-have-
reversed/). 
Pew Research Center. 2013. "Immigration: Key Data Points from Pew Research." Pew Research Center RSS. N.p., 
Retrieved October 31, 2014 (http://www.pewresearch.org/key-data-points/immigration-tip-sheet-on-u-s-public-
opinion/). 
Popescu, Roxana. 2014. "Frequently Asked Questions about the Migrant Crisis." U-T San Diego. San Diego Union-Tribue, 
Retrieved October 31, 2014 (http://www.utsandiego.com/news/2014/jul/22/Migrant-crisis-FAQ/). 
Reyes, Raul A. 2014. "Murrieta Immigration Protests Were Unfortunate, Unnecessary." The Huffington Post. 
TheHuffingtonPost.com, Retrieved October 31, 2014 (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/raul-a-reyes/murrieta-
immigration-prot_b_5569351.html). 
Simon, Julian Lincoln. 1981. The Ultimate Resource. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Spagat, Elliot. 2019. "US Sees Limitations on Reuniting Migrant Families." Associated Press. February 2 2019. 
(https://apnews.com/article/48210bbf243e423ea151ff04e4878ce6) 

 
 
The United Nations Refugee Agency. 2014. "World Refugee Day: Global Forced Displacement Tops 50 Million for First 
Time in Post-World War II Era." UNHCR News. N.p., Retrieved October 31, 2014 
(http://www.unhcr.org/53a155bc6.html). 
U.S. Congress. 2008. The William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008. 7311, 110 
Cong., U.S. G.P.O. (enacted). Print. 
World Bank. 2019. "Fertility Rate." "Mortality Rate." The World Bank Data. Retrieved April 1, 2021. 
(https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.DYN.TFRT.IN) 
11.2   Urbanization 
BBC. 2005. “Timeline: French Riots—A Chronology of Key Events.” November 14. Retrieved December 9, 2011 
(http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/4413964.stm). 
Burgess, Ernest. 1925. “The Growth of the City.” Pp. 47–62 in The City, edited by R. Park and E. Burgess. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Chandler, Tertius and Gerald Fox. 1974. 3000 Years of Urban History. New York: Academic Press. 
Dougherty, Connor. 2008. “The End of White Flight.” Wall Street Journal, July 19. Retrieved December 12, 2011 
(http://online.wsj.com/article/SB121642866373567057.html). 
Feagin, Joe, and Robert Parker. 1990. Building American Cities: The Urban Real Estate Game. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall. 
France24. 2010. “Sarkozy Promises War without Mercy for Paris Suburbs.” France 24, April 10. Retrieved December 9, 
2011 (http://www.france24.com/en/20100420-sarkozy-war-suburbs-drugs-crime-violence-truancy-tremblay-en-
france-saint-denis-france). 
LeBlanc, Adrien Nicole. 2003. Random Family: Love, Drugs, Trouble and Coming of Age in the Bronx. New York: Scribner. 
Park, Robert. 1934 [1915]. “The City: Suggestions for Investigations of Human Behavior in the City.” American Journal of 
Sociology 20:577–612. 
Park, Robert. 1936. “Human Ecology.” American Journal of Sociology 42:1–15. 
Old Bailey Proceedings Online. 2011. “Population History of London.” Retrieved December 11, 2011 
(http://www.oldbaileyonline.org/static/Population-history-of-london.jsp). 
Sciolino, Elaine, and Ariane Bernand. 2006. “Anger Festering in French Areas Scarred in Riots.” New York Times, 
October 21. Retrieved December 11, 2011 
(http://www.nytimes.com/2006/10/21/world/europe/21france.html?scp=2&sq=paris+suburb&st=nyt). 
Sjoberg, Gideon. 1965. The Preindustrial City: Past and Present. New York: Free Press. 
Talbot, Margaret. 2003. “Review: Random Family. Love, Drugs, Trouble and Coming of Age in the Bronx.” New York 
Times, February 9. Retrieved December 12, 2011 (http://www.nytimes.com/2003/02/09/books/in-the-other-
country.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm). 
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. 2014. “World Urbanization Prospects: 
The 2014 Revision, Highlights” (ST/ESA/SER.A/352). Retrieved November 3, 2014 
(http://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/Highlights/WUP2014-Highlights.pdf). 
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. 2018. "68% of the world population 
projected to live in urban areas by 2050, says UN." May 16, 2018. 
(https://www.un.org/development/desa/en/news/population/2018-revision-of-world-urbanization-
prospects.html) 

 
 
United States Census Bureau. 2014, "2010 Census Urban and Rural Classification and Urban Area Criteria." Retrieved 
December 16, 2014 (http://www.census.gov/geo/reference/ua/urban-rural-2010.html). 
11.3   The Environment and Society 
American Indian Cultural Support. 2006. “Short History of Big Mountain—Black Mesa.” Retrieved January 22, 2012 
(http://www.aics.org/BM/bm.html). 
Bertolucci, Jeff. 2009. “How Green Is Your Apple?” Macworld, April 22. Retrieved December 14, 2011 
(http://www.macworld.com/article/140122/2009/04/greenapple3.html). 
Blanchard, Ben. 2007. “Coke Vows to Reduce Water Used in Drink Production.” Reuters, June 5. Retrieved December 
14, 2011 (http://www.reuters.com/article/2007/06/05/environment-coke-water-dc-
idUSSP28630420070605). 
Bullard, Robert D., Paul Mohai, Robin Saha, and Beverly Wright. 2007. Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty: 1987–2007. 
United Church of Christ Commission for Racial Justice. Retrieved January 22, 2012 
(http://www.ucc.org/assets/pdfs/toxic20.pdf). 
Bureau of Indian Affairs. 2012. “FAQs.” Retrieved January 22, 2012 (http://www.bia.gov/FAQ/index/htm). 
Centers for Disease Control. 2016. "Global WASH Fast Facts." Updated 2016. 
(https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/global/wash_statistics.html) 
DeKok, David. 1986. Unseen Danger: A Tragedy of People, Government, and the Centralia Mine Fire. Philadelphia, PA: 
University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Environmental Justice Case Studies. 2004. University of Michigan. Retrieved January 22, 2012 
(http://www.umich.edu/~snre492/cses.html). 
Frosch, Dan. 2009. “Uranium Contamination Haunts Navajo Country.” New York Times, July 27. Retrieved January 22, 
2012 (http://www.newyorktimes.com/2009/07/27/us/navajo.html). 
Greenpeace. 2011. “Greenpeace Guide to Greener Electronics.” November. Retrieved December 13, 2011 
(http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/campaigns/toxics/electronics). 
Greenpeace. 2012. "Greenpeace Guide to Greener Electronics." November. Retrieved December 17, 2014 
(http://www.greenpeace.org/international/en/campaigns/climate-change/cool-it/Campaign-analysis/Guide-to-
Greener-Electronics/). 
Hardin, Garrett. 1968. “The Tragedy of the Commons,” Science 162(3859):1243–1248. Retrieved December 10, 2011 
(http://www.sciencemag.org/content/162/3859/1243.full). 
Kamps, Kevin. 2001. “Environmental Racism, Tribal Sovereignty and Nuclear Waste.” Nuclear Information and Resource 
Service. Retrieved January 22, 2012 (http://www.nirs.org/factsheets/pfsejfactsheet.htm). 
Kennedy, Brian, and Tyson, Alec. 2024. How Americans view climate change and policies to address the issue. Pew 
Research Center. Accessed November, 2025 at: https://www.pewresearch.org/science/2024/12/09/how-
americans-view-climate-change-and-policies-to-address-the-issue/ 
NASA. 2014. “NASA Finds 2013 Sustained Long-Term Climate Warming Trend.” NASA, January 21. Retrieved October 
27, 2014(http://www.giss.nasa.gov/research/news/20140121/). 
NASA. 2021. "2020 Tied for Warmest Year on Record, NASA Analysis Shows." January 14 2021. 
(https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/2020-tied-for-warmest-year-on-record-nasa-analysis-shows) 

 
 
Ogunseitanl, Oladele, Julie M. Stoning, Jean-Daniel M. Sapphires, and Andrew A. Shapiro. 2009. “The Electronics 
Revolution: From E-Wonderland to E-Wasteland.” Science 326(5953):670–671. Retrieved December 14, 2011 
(http://www.sciencemag.org/content/326/5953/670.summary). 
Papenfuss, Mary. 2011. “Cynical Chinese Taking Own Smog Readings.” Newser, December 8. Retrieved January 23, 
2012 (http://www.newser.com/story/134966/cynical-chinese-taking-own-smog-readings.html). 
Sadoff E-Recycling. 2019. "Electronics Recycling and Business." September 17, 2019. 
(https://sadoffelectronicsrecycling.com/blog/4-companies-electronic-recycling/) 
Stone, Maddie. 2020. "Solar Panels Are Starting to Die, Leaving Behind Toxic Trash." Wired. August 22 2020. 
(https://www.wired.com/story/solar-panels-are-starting-to-die-leaving-behind-toxic-trash/) 
Troilo, Pete. 2012. "Yes, We Can? Obama's Global Climate Change Initiative." International Development. Devex, January 
30. Retrieved October 27, 2014 (https://www.devex.com/news/yes-we-can-obama-s-global-climate-change-
initiative-77363). 
Turneffe Atoll Trust. 2008. “Improper Development: Recommendations of the Turneffe Atoll Coastal Advisory 
Committee.” Retrieved December 14, 2011 (http://www.turneffeatoll.org/threats-to-turneffe-atoll/improper-
development-practices). 
UNDP. 2021. "The People's Climate Vote." United Nations Development Programme. January 26 2021. 
(https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/climate-and-disaster-resilience-/The-Peoples-
Climate-Vote-Results.html) 
United States. 2011. “Chemicals Used in Hydraulic Fracturing.” Washington, D.C: U.S. House of Representatives, 
Committee on Energy and Commerce. Retrieved October 29, 2014 
(http://democrats.energycommerce.house.gov/sites/default/files/documents/Hydraulic%20Fracturing%20Rep
ort%204.18.11.pdf). 
Water.org. 2021. "The Water Crisis." Retrieved April 1 2021. (https://water.org/our-impact/water-crisis/) 
WaterCalculator.org. 2020. "Food's Big Water Footprint." April 25 2020. 
(https://www.watercalculator.org/footprint/foods-big-water-footprint/)