Chapter 12: Social Change and Collective Behaviors 
 
Introduction   
When considering social movements, the images that come to mind are often the most dramatic and dynamic: the 
Boston Tea Party, Martin Luther King's speech at the 1963 March on Washington, anti-war protesters putting flowers in 
soldiers' rifles, Gloria Richardson brushing away a National Guardsman’s bayonet at a demonstration, or a lone 
individual facing a line of tanks in Tiananmen Square. 
But efforts to reshape society happen every day, often in less dramatic forms, by people of all backgrounds and ages. 
Organizing an awareness event, volunteering at a shelter, donating to a cause, speaking at a school board meeting, 
running for office, or writing an article are all ways that people participate in or promote social movements. Some 
people contribute to social change by educating themselves through books or trainings. Others find one person to help 
at a time.  
One social movement that captured the attention of the public and social scientists was Occupy Wall Street (OWS). This 
movement was distinct from previously studied social movements in several regards. OWS is set apart by its lack of a 
single message, its leaderless organization, 
and its target—financial institutions instead 
of the government. OWS baffled much of the 
public, and certainly the media, leading 
many to ask, "Who are they, and what do 
they want?" 
On July 13, 2011, the organization 
Adbusters posted on its blog, "Are you ready 
for a Tahrir moment? On September 17th, 
flood into lower Manhattan, set up tents, 
kitchens, peaceful barricades and occupy 
Wall Street" (Castells 2012). The "Tahrir 
moment" was a reference to the 2010 
political uprising that began in Tunisia and 
spread throughout the Middle East and 
North Africa, including Egypt’s Tahrir Square 
in Cairo. Although OWS was a reaction to the 
continuing financial chaos that resulted 
from the 2008 market meltdown and not a 
political movement, the Arab Spring was its 
catalyst. 
Spanish sociologist Manuel Castells (2012) 
argues the Occupy movement was not only a 
12.1   Collective Behavior  
12.2   Social Movements    
12.3   Social Change 
 
Figure  12.1   Activism can take the form of enormous marches, 
violent clashes, fundraising, social media activity, or silent displays. In 
this 2016 photo, people wear hoods and prison jumpsuits to protest 
the conditions at Guantanamo Bay Prison, where at that time more 
than 50 of 780 detainees had been held for over a decade without 
trial as illegal enemy combatants. (Credit: Debra Sweet/flickr) 

 
 
response to the global financial crisis in 2008 but also to the decades-long increase in economic inequality in the U.S. 
He points to evidence that, since the 1980s, household incomes at the top of the income distribution grew significantly 
faster than those at the bottom (Congressional Budget Office, 2024). Additionally, the country’s leading financial 
institutions, that many people thought were to blame for the crisis, were in trouble after less qualified borrowers 
defaulted on their mortgage loans when the loans’ interest rates rose. The banks were eventually "bailed" out by the 
government with $700 billion of taxpayer money.  
On September 17, 2011, an anniversary of the signing of the U.S. Constitution, the occupation began. About one 
thousand protestors descended upon Wall Street, and up to 20,000 people moved into Zuccotti Park, only two blocks 
away, where they began building a village of tents and organizing a system of communication. The protest soon began 
spreading throughout the nation and in other countries, and its members started calling themselves "the 99 percent." 
Over the next several months, more than a thousand cities and towns had Occupy demonstrations around the world. 
A sociological study of OWS might engage with the following questions: 
• 
What did they want? Using Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, and live-stream video, the protesters conveyed a multifold 
message with a long list of reforms and social change, including the need to address the rising disparity of 
wealth, the influence of money on election outcomes, political favoring of the rich, and rising student debt. 
• 
What did they accomplish? Despite headlines at the time softly mocking OWS for lack of cohesion and lack of 
clear messaging, the movement is credited 
with bringing attention to income inequality 
and the seemingly preferential treatment of 
financial institutions accused of 
wrongdoing.  
• 
What is the long-term impact? Has the 
United States reduced the upward trend of 
income inequality through changes in 
taxation and entitlements? Certainly not, 
income inequality has generally increased. 
But is a major shift in our future? 
This chapter shows the evolution of thought behind 
the scientific study of collective behavior and social 
movements. Sociologists have developed a number 
of theoretical perspectives about why groups come 
 
Figure  12.2   Is this a good time had by all? Some flash mobs 
may function as political protests, while others are for fun. 
(Credit Richard Wood/flickr) 
Sociology in the Real World 
Flash Mobs and Challenges 
In March 2014, a group of musicians got together in a fish market in Odessa, Ukraine, for a spontaneous 
performance of Beethoven's “Ode to Joy” from his Ninth Symphony. While tensions were building over Ukraine's 
efforts to join the European Union, and even as Russian troops had taken control of the Ukrainian airbase in Belbek, 
the Odessa Philharmonic Orchestra and Opera Chorus tried to lighten the troubled times for shoppers with music and 
song. Spontaneous gatherings like this are called flash mobs, and sociologists see them as one type of “collective 
behavior.” 
Humans seek connections and shared experiences. Perhaps experiencing a flash mob event enhances this bond. It 
certainly interrupts our otherwise mundane routine with a reminder that we are social animals. 

 
 
together to achieve social change and how norms, resources, and social structures shape those efforts.  
12.1   Collective Behavior 
Forms of Collective Behavior 
Flash mobs are examples of collective behavior, noninstitutionalized activity in which several or many people voluntarily 
engage. Other examples are a group of commuters traveling home from work and a population of teens adopting a 
favorite singer’s hairstyle. In short, collective behavior is any group behavior that is not mandated or regulated by an 
institution. There are three primary forms of collective behavior: the crowd, the mass, and the public. 
A crowd is a fairly large number of people in close proximity (Lofland 1993). Collective groups can also be identified in 
two other ways. A mass is a relatively large number of people with a common interest, though they may not be in close 
proximity (Lofland 1993), such as players of the popular Facebook game Farmville. A public, on the other hand, is an 
unorganized, relatively diffused group of people who share ideas, such as the Libertarian political party. While these two 
types of collective groups are similar, they are not the same. To distinguish between them, remember that members of 
a mass share interests, whereas members of a public share ideas. 
Theoretical Perspectives on Collective Behavior 
Early collective behavior theories (Le Bon 1895; Blumer 1969) focused on the irrationality of crowds. Eventually, those 
theorists who viewed crowds as uncontrolled groups of irrational people were supplanted by theorists who viewed the 
behavior some crowds engaged in as the rational behavior of logical beings. 
Emergent-Norm Perspective  
Sociologists Ralph Turner and Lewis Killian (1993) developed what 
is known as emergent norm theory. They believe that the norms 
experienced by people in a crowd may be disparate and fluctuating. 
They emphasize the importance of these norms in shaping crowd 
behavior, especially those norms that shift quickly in response to 
changing external factors. Emergent norm theory asserts that, in 
this circumstance, people perceive and respond to the crowd 
situation with their particular (individual) set of norms, which may 
change as the crowd experience evolves. This focus on the 
individual component of interaction reflects a symbolic 
interactionist perspective. 
For Turner and Killian, the process begins when individuals suddenly 
find themselves in a new situation, or when an existing situation 
suddenly becomes strange or unfamiliar. For example, think about 
human behavior during Hurricane Katrina in August 2005. New 
Orleans was decimated and some residents were trapped without 
supplies or a way to evacuate. In these extraordinary circumstances, 
what outsiders saw as “looting” was defined by those involved as seeking needed supplies for survival. Normally, 
individuals would not wade into a corner gas station and take canned goods without paying, but given that they were 
suddenly in a greatly changed situation, they established a norm that they felt was reasonable. 
Once individuals find themselves in a situation ungoverned by previously established norms, they interact in small 
groups to develop new guidelines on how to behave. According to the emergent-norm perspective, crowds are not 
viewed as irrational, impulsive, uncontrolled groups. Instead, new norms develop and are accepted as they fit the 
situation. While this theory offers insight into why norms develop, it leaves undefined the nature of norms, how they 
come to be accepted by the crowd, and how they spread through the crowd. 
 
Figure  12.3  According to the emergent-norm 
perspective, Hurricane Katrina victims sought 
needed supplies for survival, but to some 
outsiders their behavior was normally seen as 
looting. (Credit: Infrogmation/Wikimedia 
Commons) 

 
 
Value-Added Theory 
Sociologist Neil Smelser (1962) meticulously studied different instances of crowd behavior and developed value-added 
theory. Smelser’s theory is within the functionalist tradition and holds that several conditions must be in place for 
collective behavior to occur, which each condition adding to the likelihood.  
The first condition is structural conduciveness, which occurs when people are aware of a social issue or problem and 
have the opportunity to gather, ideally in an open area. Structural strain, the second condition, refers to when people’s 
expectations about a situation are unmet, leading to tension and strain. The next condition is the growth and spread of a 
generalized belief, wherein a problem is clearly identified and attributed to a person or group. 
Fourth, precipitating factors spur collective behavior; this is the emergence of a dramatic event. The fifth condition is 
mobilization for action, when leaders emerge to direct a crowd to 
action. The final condition, social control, relates to actions taken 
by formal agents like the police or the military to end collective 
behavior by interrupting or deflecting the behavior once started 
(Smelser 1962). 
A real-life example of these conditions occurred after the fatal 
police shooting of teenager Michael Brown, an unarmed 
eighteen-year-old African American, in Ferguson, MO on August 9, 
2014. The shooting drew national attention almost immediately. 
A large group of mostly Black, local residents assembled in 
protest—a classic example of structural conduciveness. When the 
community perceived that the police were not acting in the 
people's interest and were withholding the name of the officer, 
structural strain became evident. A growing generalized belief 
evolved as the crowd of protesters were met with heavily armed 
police in military-style protective uniforms accompanied by an 
armored vehicle. The precipitating factor of the arrival of the 
police spurred greater collective behavior as the residents 
mobilized by assembling a parade down the street. Missouri 
police officers attempted to exert social control over the protests, 
at times using tear gas, pepper spray, and rubber bullets. This 
instance of collective behavior finally ended on August 18, when 
the governor called in the National Guard. 
Assembling Perspective 
Interactionist sociologist Clark McPhail (1991) developed assembling perspective, another system for understanding 
collective behavior that credited individuals in crowds as rational beings. McPhail’s theory focused primarily on the 
 
Figure  12.4  Agents of social control bring 
collective behavior to an end. (Credit: hozinja/flickr) 
Type of crowd behavior 
Description 
Example 
Convergence clusters 
Family and friends who travel together 
Carpooling parents take several 
children to the movies 
Convergent orientation 
Group all facing the same direction 
A semi-circle around a stage 
Collective vocalization 
Sounds or noises made collectively 
Screams on a roller coaster 
Collective verbalization 
Collective and simultaneous participation in a 
speech or song 
Pledge of Allegiance in the school 
classroom 
Collective gesticulation 
Body parts forming symbols 
The YMCA dance 
Collective manipulation 
Objects collectively moved around 
Holding signs at a protest rally 
Collective locomotion 
The direction and rate of movement to the event 
Children running to an ice cream truck 
Table  12.1  Clark McPhail identified various circumstances of convergent and collective behavior (McPhail 1991). 

 
 
different types of crowd behavior. He identified several instances of convergent or collective behavior, as shown on the 
chart below. 
As useful as this is for understanding the components of how crowds come together to engage in collective behavior, 
many sociologists criticize its focus on individual actions and the lack of attention given to the larger cultural context. 
12.2   Social Movements 
Social movements are subtype of 
collective behavior. They are purposeful, 
organized groups that strive to work 
toward a common social goal. While most 
of us learned about social movements in 
history classes, we tend to take for 
granted the fundamental changes they 
caused —and we may be completely 
unfamiliar with global social movements. 
But from the antitobacco movement that 
has worked to outlaw smoking in public 
buildings and raise the cost of cigarettes, 
to political uprisings throughout the Arab 
world, movements are creating social 
change on a global scale. 
Levels of Social Movements 
Movements happen in our towns, in our 
nation, and around the world. Let’s take a 
look at examples of social movements, 
from local to global. No doubt you can think of others on all of these levels, especially since modern technology has 
allowed us a near-constant stream of information about the quest for social change around the world. 
Local 
Local social movements typically refer to those in cities or towns, but they can also affect smaller constituencies, such 
as college campuses. Sometimes colleges are smaller hubs of a national movement, as seen during the Vietnam War 
protests or the Black Lives Matter protests. Other 
times, colleges are managing a more local issue. 
For example, after announcing a significant 
budget shortfall, the Wisconsin legislature and 
Governor Scott Walker advanced a “budget repair 
bill” in early 2011 that would reduce the collective 
bargaining abilities of unions and other 
organizations in the state. Faculty at the state's 
college system were not in unions, but teaching 
assistants, researchers, and other staff had 
regularly collectively bargained. Faced with the 
prospect of reduced job protections, pay, and 
benefits, staff members at the University of 
Wisconsin protested Governor Walker’s proposal  
on Valentine’s Day and then moved the protest to 
the Wisconsin State Capitol. Over the next few 
days, the size of the crowd reached more than 
 
Figure  12.5  Staff at University of Wisconsin protest a proposed law that 
would significantly reduce their ability to bargain for better pay and 
benfits. (Credit: marctasman/flickr) 
 
Figure  12.6   Texas Secede! is an organization which would like 
Texas to secede from the United States. (Credit: Tim Pearce/flickr) 

 
 
70,000 protestors, including individuals who opposed the bill and 
others who supported it. Protest activity continued, and sometimes 
turned ugly, until June when the Wisconsin Supreme Court upheld the 
bill.  
State 
The most impactful state-level protest would be to cease being a 
state, and organizations in several states are working toward that 
goal. Texas secession has been a relatively consistent movement 
since about 1990. The past decade has seen an increase in rhetoric 
and campaigns to drive interest and support for a public referendum 
on secession. The Texas Nationalist Movement “Texas Secede!” and 
other groups have created formal proposals and run public 
information campaigns to make the idea seem more feasible. “Texit” 
has become a widely used nickname and hashtag for the movement. 
In February 2021, a bill was introduced to hold a referendum that 
would begin formal discussions on creating an independent nation—
though the bill's sponsor indicated that it was mainly intended to 
begin a conversation rather than directly lead to secession (De Alba 
2021). 
States also get involved in movement activity in response to federal 
policies or decisions. The legalization of same-sex marriage 
throughout the United States led some people to feel their religious 
beliefs were under attack. Following swiftly upon the heels of the Supreme Court Obergefell ruling in 2015, the Indiana 
legislature passed a Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA). Originally crafted decades ago with the purpose of 
preserving the rights of minority religious people, recent RFRA laws allow individuals, businesses, and other 
organizations to decide whom they will serve based on religious beliefs. For example, Arkansas's 2021 law allowed 
doctors to refuse to treat patients based on the doctor's religious beliefs (Associated Press 2021).  
Global 
Social organizations worldwide take stands on such general areas of concern as poverty, sex trafficking, and the use of 
genetically modified organisms (GMOs) in food. Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) are sometimes formed to 
support such movements, such as the International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movement (FOAM). Global efforts 
to reduce poverty are represented by the Oxford Committee for Famine Relief (OXFAM), among others. The Fair Trade 
movement exists to protect and support food producers in developing countries. Occupy Wall Street, although initially a 
local movement, also went global throughout Europe and, as the chapter’s introductory photo shows, the Middle East. 
Stages of Social Movements 
Later sociologists studied the lifecycle of social movements—how they emerge, grow, and in some cases, die out. This is 
similar to Smelser’s value-added depiction of the conditions leading to collective behavior. Blumer (1969) and Tilly 
(1978) outline a four-stage process. In the preliminary stage, people become aware of an issue, and leaders emerge. 
This is followed by the coalescence stage when people join together and organize in order to publicize the issue and 
raise awareness. In the institutionalization stage, the movement no longer requires grassroots volunteerism: it is an 
established organization, typically with a paid staff. When people fall away and adopt a new movement, the movement 
successfully brings about the change it sought, or when people no longer take the issue seriously, the movement falls 
into the decline stage.  
 
Figure  12.7   At the time of this writing, 
marriage for same-sex couples is legal in all 
fifty states and the District of Columbia due 
to the Supreme Court’s Obergefell ruling; 
nonetheless, around half of states have 
constitutional or state law bans on same-sex 
marriage, though none are enforceable due 
to Obergefell. (Credit: Jose Antonio 
Navas/flickr). 

 
 
Social Media and Social Movements 
Social media is a widely used mechanism 
in social movements. In the Chapter 7 
talking about Groups and Organizations, 
we discussed Tarana Burke first using 
"Me Too" in 2006 on a major social 
media venue of the time (MySpace). The 
phrase grew into a massive movement 
when people began using it on Twitter to 
drive empathy and support regarding 
experiences of sexual harassment or 
sexual assault. In a similar way, Black 
Lives Matter began as a social media 
message after George Zimmerman was 
acquitted in the shooting death of 17-
year-old Trayvon Martin, and the phrase 
burgeoned into a much larger and 
formalized movement in subsequent 
years. 
Social media has the potential to 
dramatically transform how people get 
involved in movements ranging from local 
school district decisions to presidential 
campaigns. As movements go through 
the stages identified by Blumer and Tilly, and social media adds a dynamic to each of them. In the preliminary stage, 
people become aware of an issue, and leaders emerge. Compared to movements of 20 or 30 years ago, social media 
can accelerate this stage substantially. Issue awareness can spread at the speed of a click, with thousands of people 
across the globe becoming informed at the same time. In a similar vein, those who are savvy and engaged with social 
media may emerge as leaders, even if, for example, they are not great public speakers. 
At the next stage, the coalescence stage, social media is also transformative. Coalescence is the point when people join 
together to publicize the issue and get organized. President Obama’s 2008 campaign was a case study in organizing 
through social media. Using Twitter and other online tools, the campaign engaged volunteers who had typically not 
bothered with politics. Combined with comprehensive data tracking and the ability to micro-target, the campaign 
became a blueprint for others to build on. The 2020 elections featured a level of data analysis and rapid response 
capabilities that, while echoing the Obama campaign's early work, made the 2008 campaign look quaint. The 
campaigns and political analysts could measure the level of social media interaction following any campaign stop, 
debate, statement by the candidate, news mention, or any other event, and measure whether the tone or "sentiment" 
was positive or negative. In contrast to traditional political polls, social media provides instant feedback and 
opportunities for campaigns to act, react, or ask for donations based on something that had occurred just hours earlier 
(Knowledge at Wharton 2020). 
Social media can take on more complex roles once a movement reaches the institutionalization stage. In some cases, a 
formal organization might exist alongside the hashtag or general sentiment, as is the case with Black Lives Matter 
(BLM). At any one time, BLM is essentially three things: a structured organization, an idea with deep and personal 
meaning for people, and a widely used phrase or hashtag. People who use the #BlackLivesMatter hashtag may or may 
not be referring to the formal organization, nor do they necessarily agree with all of the organization's principles or its 
leadership. And in other cases, people may be very aligned with all three contexts of the phrase.  
 
Figure  12.8   Are these activists most likely to have a larger impact 
through people who see their sign from the shore, or through people who 
will see pictures of their event on social media? (Credit: Backbone 
Campaign/flickr) 

 
 
In a similar way, MeToo activists, including Tarana Burke herself, have sought to clarify the interweaving of different 
aspects of the movement. She told the Harvard Gazette in 2020: 
I think we have to be careful about what we’re calling the movement. And I think one of the things I’ve learned 
in the last two years is that folks don’t really understand what a movement is or how it’s defined. The people 
using the hashtag on the internet were the impetus for Me Too being put into the public sphere. The media 
coverage of the viralness of Me Too and the people being accused are media coverage of a popular story that 
derived from the hashtag. The movement is the work that our organization and others like us are doing to both 
support survivors and move people to action (Walsh 2020). 
Sociologists have identified high-risk activism, such as the civil rights movement, as a “strong-tie” phenomenon, 
meaning that people are far more likely to stay engaged in the movement if they have close friends who are also 
engaged. The people who dropped out of the civil rights movement—who left after the danger became too great—did not 
display any less ideological commitment. But they lacked the strong-tie connection to other people who were staying. 
Are interpersonal connections that are made through social media strong-tie or weak-tie connections? Sociologists 
initially were skeptical that social media connections could be more than weak-tie “weak-tie” and such connections 
would not encourage people to persist in high-risk activism (McAdam 1993 and Brown 2011). However, it is now more 
obvious that connections made through social media can be as strong as other ties. For example, if people, who had for 
years known each other only through an online group, meet in person at an event, they may feel far more connected at 
that event and afterward than people who had never interacted before. And as we discussed in the Groups chapter, 
social media itself, even if people never meet, can bring people into primary group status, forming stronger ties. 
Another way to consider the impact of social media on activism is through something that may or may not be 
emotional, has little implications regarding tie strength, and may be fleeting rather than permanent, but still be one of 
the largest considerations of any formal social movement: money. Returning to politics, think of the massive amounts 
of campaign money raised in each election cycle through social media. In the 2020 Presidential election and its 
aftermath, hundreds of millions of dollars were raised through social media. Likewise, 55 percent of people who engage 
with nonprofits through social media take some sort of action; and for 60 percent of them (or 33 percent of the total) 
that action is to give money to support the cause (Nonprofit Source 2020). 
Theoretical Perspectives on Social Movements 
In previous chapters, theoretical perspectives were introduced based on broader perspectives – functionalist, conflict, 
and symbolic interactionist perspectives. However, theories related to social movements integrate ideas across all three 
perspectives. Most theories of social movements are called collective action theories, indicating the purposeful nature 
of this form of collective behavior. The following three theories are but a few of the many social movement theories 
developed by social scientists. 
Resource Mobilization 
McCarthy and Zald (1977) conceptualize resource mobilization theory as a way to explain movement success in terms 
of the ability to acquire resources and mobilize individuals. They shifted the focus of researchers away from the question 
of why people protest to how movements effectively marshal resources to achieve movement goals. Movements 
compete for resources like money, volunteers, and social networks, and those with stronger organizational structures 
and better access to resources are more likely to succeed. Resource mobilization theory turns our attention from the 
angry mob or the brave hero to the resources and organizational structures that underly effective social movements. 
Resource Mobilization and the Civil Rights Movement 
The key ideas of resource mobilization theory can be seen in the activities of the civil rights movement in the decade 
between the mid 1950s and the mid 1960s. Social movements had existed before, notably the Women's Suffrage 
Movement and a long line of labor movements, thus constituting an existing social movement sector. The civil rights 
movement had also existed well before Rosa Parks famously refused to give up her bus seat to a white man. What is 
less well known is that Parks was a member of the NAACP and trained in leadership (A&E Television Networks, LLC. 

 
 
2014). But her action that day was spontaneous and unplanned (Schmitz 2014). Her arrest triggered a public outcry 
that led to the famous Montgomery bus boycott, turning the movement into what we now think of as the "civil rights 
movement" (Schmitz 2014). 
Mobilization had to begin immediately. Boycotting the bus made other means of transportation necessary, which was 
provided through carpools. Churches and their ministers joined the struggle, and the protest organization In Friendship 
was formed as well as The Friendly Club and the Club From Nowhere.  
Martin Luther King Jr. emerged during 
these events to become the charismatic 
leader of the movement, gained respect 
from elites in the federal government, 
and aided by even more emerging social 
movement organizations such as the 
Student Non-Violent Coordinating 
Committee (SNCC), the Congress of 
Racial Equality (CORE), the National 
Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People (NAACP), and the 
Southern Christian Leadership 
Conference (SCLC), among others. 
Several still exist today. Although the 
movement in that period was an overall 
success, and laws were changed (even if 
not attitudes), the "movement" 
continues. One of the victories of the Civil 
Rights Movement was the Voting Rights 
Act of 1965, which required jurisdictions 
with a record history of electoral racial 
discrimination to get federal approval 
before revising their voting laws, a requirement known as "preclearance." Though this provision was meant to expire 
after five years, it was repeatedly renewed by Congress with the current expiration set for 2031. However, the Supreme 
Court's 2013 decision in Shelby County vs. Holder nullified the formula that determined which counties should be 
subject to preclearance, ending this provision of the Voting Rights Act. The majority opinion concluded that such 
protections were no longer needed, while the justices in dissent cautioned that the minority vote would suffer.  
Framing/Frame Analysis 
Sociology has come a long way from its early focus on the irrational behavior of different types of crowds. Over the past 
several decades, sociologists have developed the concept of frames to explain how individuals identify and understand 
social events and which norms they should follow in any given situation (Goffman 1974; Snow et al. 1986; Benford and 
Snow 2000). Imagine entering a restaurant. Your “frame” immediately provides you with a behavior template. It 
probably does not occur to you to wear pajamas to a fine-dining establishment, throw food at other patrons, or spit your 
drink onto the table. However, eating food at a sleepover pizza party provides you with an entirely different behavior 
template or frame. It might be perfectly acceptable to eat in your pajamas and maybe even throw popcorn at others or 
guzzle drinks from cans. 
Successful social movements use three kinds of frames (Snow and Benford 1988) to further their goals. The first type, 
diagnostic framing, states the problem in a clear, easily understood way. When applying diagnostic frames, there are no 
shades of gray: instead, there is the belief that what “they” do is wrong and this is how “we” will fix it. Climate change 
activist organizations use diagnostic framing by stating that human-caused carbon emissions and reliance on fossil 
fuels are responsible for global warming, rising sea levels, and extreme weather. Prognostic framing, the second type, 
 
Figure  12.9   Resource mobilization theory applies an 
industrial/organizational approach to highlight how diverse organizations 
work in conjunction or in opposition to effect social change. 

 
 
offers a solution and states how it will be implemented. In the climate change movement, the different solutions 
proposed include incentivizing renewable energy sources like wind and solar, enforcing stricter carbon emission limits, 
or implementing carbon taxes. Even within the same movement, there may be multiple prognostic frames ranging from 
corporate accountability to international climate agreements to individual lifestyle changes. Finally, motivational 
framing is the call to action: what should you do once you agree with the diagnostic frame and believe in the prognostic 
frame? These frames are action-oriented. Climate activists may encourage people to attend environmental protests, 
vote for candidates who support green policies, pressure governments to sign international treaties, or support 
organizations working toward carbon reduction. The motivational frame presents these as necessary steps to prevent 
environmental catastrophe.  
With so many similar diagnostic frames, some groups find it best to join together to maximize their impact. When social 
movements link their goals to the goals of other social movements and merge into a single group, they engage in a 
process of “frame alignment” (Snow et al. 1986)—an ongoing and intentional means of recruiting participants to the 
movement. 
This frame alignment process has four aspects: bridging, amplification, extension, and transformation. Bridging 
describes a “bridge” that connects uninvolved individuals and unorganized or ineffective groups with social movements 
that, though structurally unconnected, nonetheless share similar interests or goals. Recent examples include the Sierra 
Club coordinating with the NAACP to achieve a larger base of individuals concerned about environmental racism, or the 
NRA reaching out to the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service to broaden their recruitment of conservation-oriented individuals. 
In the amplification model, organizations seek to expand their core ideas to gain a wider, more universal appeal. By 
expanding their ideas to include a broader range, they can mobilize more people for their cause. For example, the Slow 
Food movement extends its arguments in support of local food to encompass reduced energy consumption, pollution, 
obesity from eating more healthfully, and more. 
In extension, social movements agree to mutually promote each other, even when the two social movement 
organization’s goals don’t necessarily relate to each other’s immediate goals. This often occurs when organizations are 
sympathetic to each others’ causes, even if they are not directly aligned, such as women’s equal rights and the civil 
rights movement. 
Transformation means a complete revision of goals. Once a movement has succeeded, it risks losing relevance. If it 
wants to remain active, the movement has to change or risk becoming obsolete. For instance, when the women’s 
suffrage movement gained women the right to vote, members turned their attention to advocating equal rights and 
campaigning to elect women to office. In short, transformation is an evolution in the existing diagnostic or prognostic 
frames that generally achieves a total conversion of the movement. 
 
Figure  12.10   Extension occurs when social movements have sympathetic causes. Women’s rights, racial equality, and 
LGBT advocacy are all human rights issues. (Credit: Photos (a) and (b) Wikimedia Commons; Photo (c) Charlie 
Nguyen/flickr) 

 
 
New Social Movement Theory 
New social movement theory, a development of European social scientists in the 1950s and 1960s, attempts to explain 
the proliferation of postindustrial and postmodern movements that are difficult to analyze using traditional social 
movement theories. Rather than being one specific theory, it is more of a perspective that revolves around 
understanding movements as they relate to politics, identity, culture, and social change. Some of these more complex 
interrelated movements include ecofeminism, which focuses on the patriarchal society as the source of environmental 
problems, and the transgender rights movement. Sociologist Steven Buechler (2000) suggests that we should be 
looking at the bigger picture in which these movements arise—shifting to a macro-level, global analysis of social 
movements. 
21.3   Social Change 
Collective behavior and social movements are just two of the forces driving social change, which is the change in society 
created through social movements as well as external factors. Essentially, any disruptive shift in the status quo, be it 
intentional or random, human-caused or natural, can lead to social change. 
Causes of Social Change 
Throughout this text, we have discussed various causes and effects of social change. Below is a recap of some major 
drivers, including technology, social institutions, population, and the environment. Alone or in combination, these agents 
can disturb, improve, disrupt, or otherwise influence society. 
Technology 
Technology has a profound influence on society. For example, advances in medical technology allow people to live 
longer, have more children, and survive some natural disasters or problems. Advances in agricultural technology have 
allowed us to alter food products, which impacts our health as well as the environment. Advances in communications 
and transportation technologies facilitated the integration of markets, manufacturers, and supply chains that drive the 
global economy. In every case, a given technology can create beneficiaries, but that same technology—especially if it is 
disruptive—can lead others to lose their jobs, suffer from pollution, or be monitored or victimized.  
Though nearly everyone now owns a smartphone (Pew Research Center 2025), the digital divide between the 
technological haves and have-nots still exists locally and globally. More pressing than access are technological risks of 
identity theft, cyber aggression/stalking/doxing, and loss of privacy. The constant change in technology leads to an 
almost inevitable lack of preparation for new risks on both personal and societal scales. 
The Darker Side of Technology: Electronic Aggression in the Information Age 
The U.S. Center for Disease Control (CDC) uses the term "electronic aggression" to describe "any type of harassment or 
bullying that occurs through e-mail, a chat room, instant messaging, a website (including blogs), or text messaging" 
(CDC, n.d.) We generally think of this as cyberbullying. A 2011 study by the U.S. Department of Education found that 
27.8 percent of students aged twelve through eighteen reported experiencing bullying. From the same sample 9 percent 
specifically reported having been a victim of cyberbullying (Robers et al. 2013). 
Cyberbullying represents a powerful change in modern society. William F. Ogburn (1922) might have been describing it 
nearly a century ago when he defined "cultural lag," which occurs when material culture precedes nonmaterial culture. 
That is, society may not fully comprehend all the consequences of a new technology and so may initially reject it (such 
as stem cell research) or embrace it, sometimes with unintended negative consequences (such as pollution). 
Cyberbullying is a special feature of the Internet. Unique to electronic aggression is that it can happen twenty-four hours 
a day, every day; it can reach a child (or an adult) even though she or he might otherwise feel safe in a locked house. 
The messages and images may be posted anonymously and to a very wide audience, and they might even be 
impossible to trace. Finally, once posted, the texts and images are very hard to delete. Its effects range from the use of 
alcohol and drugs to lower self-esteem, health problems, and even suicide (CDC, n.d.). 

 
 
Social Institutions 
Each change in a single social institution leads to changes in all social institutions. For example, the industrialization of 
society meant that there was no longer a need for large families to produce enough manual labor to run a farm. Further, 
new job opportunities were in close proximity to urban centers where living space was at a premium. The result is that 
the average family size shrunk significantly. 
This same shift toward industrial corporate entities also changed the way we view government involvement in the 
private sector, created the global economy, provided new political platforms, and even spurred new religions and new 
forms of religious worship like Scientology. It has also informed the way we educate our children: originally schools were 
set up to accommodate an agricultural calendar so children could be home to work the fields in the summer, and even 
today, teaching models are largely based on preparing students for industrial jobs, despite that being an outdated need. 
A shift in one area, such as industrialization, means an interconnected impact across social institutions. 
Population 
Population composition is changing at every level of society. Births increase in one nation and decrease in another. 
Some families delay childbirth while others start bringing children into their folds early. Population changes can be due 
to random external forces, like an epidemic, or shifts in other social institutions, as described above. But regardless of 
why and how it happens, population trends have a tremendous and interrelated impact on all other aspects of society. 
In the United States, we are experiencing an increase in our senior population as Baby Boomers retire, which will in turn 
change the way many of our social institutions are organized. For example, there is an increased demand for housing in 
warmer climates, a massive shift in the need for elder care and assisted living facilities, and growing incidence of elder 
abuse. Retiring Boomers may also lead to labor or expertise shortages, and healthcare costs will increase to become a 
larger and larger portion of our economy. 
Globally, often the countries with the highest fertility rates are least able to absorb and attend to the needs of a growing 
population. Family planning is a large step in ensuring that families are not burdened with more children than they can 
Sociology in the Real World 
Hurricane Katrina: When It All Comes Together 
The four key elements that affect social change that are described in this chapter are the environment, technology, 
social institutions, and population. In 2005, New Orleans was struck by a devastating hurricane. But it was not just 
the hurricane that was disastrous. It was the converging of all four of these elements, and the text below will connect 
the elements by putting the words in parentheses. 
Before Hurricane Katrina (environment) hit, poorly coordinated evacuation efforts had left about 25 percent of the 
population, almost entirely African Americans who lacked private transportation, to suffer the consequences of the 
coming storm (demographics). Then "after the storm, when the levees broke, thousands more [refugees] came. And 
the city buses, meant to take them to proper shelters, were underwater" (Sullivan 2005). No public transportation 
was provided, drinking water and communications were delayed, and FEMA, the Federal Emergency Management 
Agency (institutions), was headed by an appointee with no real experience in emergency management. Those who 
were eventually evacuated did not know where they were being sent or how to contact family members. African 
Americans were sent the farthest from their homes. When the displaced began to return, public housing had not 
been reestablished, yet the Superdome stadium, which had served as a temporary disaster shelter, had been rebuilt. 
Homeowners received financial support, but renters did not. 
As it turns out, it was not entirely the hurricane that cost the lives of 1,500 people, but the fact that the city’s storm 
levees (technology), which had been built too low and which failed to meet numerous other safety specifications, 
gave way, flooding the lower portions of the city, occupied almost entirely by African Americans. 

 
 
care for. On a macro level, the increased population, particularly in the poorest parts of the globe, also leads to 
increased stress on the planet’s resources. 
The Environment 
Changes in the environment and our interaction with it can have promising or devastating effects. Access to safe water 
is a primary determinant of health and prosperity. And as human populations expand in more vulnerable areas while 
natural disasters occur with more frequency, we see an increase in the number of people affected by those disasters. 
Overall health and wellbeing are deeply affected by the environment even in urbanized areas. Many types of cancers, 
which are collectively the leading cause of death in higher-income countries, have environmental influences (Mahase 
2019). 
 
Modernization 
Modernization describes the processes that increase the amount of specialization and differentiation of structure in 
societies resulting in the move from an undeveloped society to a developed, technologically driven society (Irwin 1975). 
By this definition, the level of modernity within a society is judged by the sophistication of its technology, particularly as 
it relates to infrastructure, industry, and the like. However, it is important to note the inherent ethnocentric bias of such 
assessment. Why do we assume that those living in semi-peripheral and peripheral nations would find it so wonderful to 
become more like the core nations? Is modernization always positive? 
One contradiction of all kinds of technology is that they often promise time-saving benefits, but somehow fail to deliver. 
How many times have you ground your teeth in frustration at an Internet site that refused to load or at a dropped call on 
your cell phone? Despite time-saving devices such as dishwashers, washing machines, and, now, remote control 
vacuum cleaners, the average amount of time spent on housework is the same today as it was fifty years ago. And the 
dubious benefits of 24/7 e-mail and immediate information have simply increased the amount of time employees are 
expected to be responsive and available. While once businesses had to travel at the speed of the U.S. postal system, 
sending something off and waiting until it was received before the next stage, today the immediacy of information 
transfer means there are no such breaks. 
Further, the Internet bought us information, but at a cost. The morass of information means that there is as much poor 
information available as trustworthy sources. There is a delicate line to walk when core nations seek to bring the 
assumed benefits of modernization to more traditional cultures. For one, it is short-sighted for western governments and 
social scientists to assume all other countries aspire to follow in their footsteps. At the same time, romantic ideals of 
rural cultures uncontaminated by modernity and capitalism may downplay the often crushing poverty and diseases that 
exist in peripheral nations. Sociologists and social scientists approach the study of social change in very carefully to 
understand both the need for cultural identity and preservation as well as the hopes for future growth. 
 
Key Terms 
assembling perspective: a theory that credits individuals in crowds as behaving as rational thinkers and views crowds as 
engaging in purposeful behavior and collective action 
collective behavior: a noninstitutionalized activity in which several people voluntarily engage 
crowd: a fairly large number of people who share close proximity 
diagnostic framing: a social problem that is stated in a clear, easily understood manner 
emergent norm theory: a perspective that emphasizes the importance of social norms in crowd behavior 
flash mob: a large group of people who gather together in a spontaneous activity that lasts a limited amount of time 

 
 
frame alignment process: using bridging, amplification, extension, and transformation as an ongoing and intentional 
means of recruiting participants to a movement 
mass: a relatively large group with a common interest, even if they may not be in close proximity 
modernization: the process that increases the amount of specialization and differentiation of structure in societies 
motivational framing: a call to action 
new social movement theory: a theory that attempts to explain the proliferation of postindustrial and postmodern 
movements that are difficult to understand using traditional social movement theories 
NGO: nongovernmental organizations working globally for numerous humanitarian and environmental causes 
prognostic framing: social movements that state a clear solution and a means of implementation 
public: an unorganized, relatively diffuse group of people who share ideas 
resource mobilization theory: a theory that explains social movements’ success in terms of their ability to acquire 
resources and mobilize individuals 
social change: the change in a society created through social movements as well as through external factors like 
environmental shifts or technological innovations 
social movement: a purposeful organized group hoping to work toward a common social goal 
social movement organization: a single social movement group 
social movement sector: the multiple social movement industries in a society, even if they have widely varying 
constituents and goals 
value-added theory: a functionalist perspective theory that posits that several preconditions must be in place for 
collective behavior to occur 
 
References 
Introduction   
AFL-CIO. 2014. "Executive Paywatch." Retrieved December 17, 2014 (http://www.aflcio.org/Corporate-
Watch/Paywatch-2014). 
Castells, Manuel. 2012. Networks of Outrage and Hope: Social Movements in the Internet Age. Cambridge, UK: Polity. 
Congressional Budget Office, Sept 2024, Trends in the Distribution of Household Income From 1979 to 2021. Accessed 
at https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2024-09/60342-Trends-Income.pdf 
Davies, James C. 1962. "Toward a Theory of Revolution." American Sociological Review 27, no. 1. Retrieved December 
17, 2014 
(http://www.jstor.org/discover/2089714?sid=21104884442891&uid=3739256&uid=3739704&uid=4&uid=2
). 
Gell, Aaron. 2011. "The Wall Street Protesters: What the Hell Do They Want?" New York Observer. Retrieved December 
17, 2014 (http://observer.com/2011/09/the-wall-street-protesters-what-the-hell-do-they-want/). 
Le Tellier, Alexandria. 2012. "What Occupy Wall Street Wants." Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 17, 2014 
(http://articles.latimes.com/2012/sep/17/news/la-ol-occupy-wall-street-anniversary-message-20120917). 

 
 
NAACP. 2011. “100 Years of History.” Retrieved December 21, 2011 (http://www.naacp.org/pages/naacp-history). 
12.1   Collective Behavior 
Blumer, Herbert. 1969. “Collective Behavior.” Pp. 67–121 in Principles of Sociology, edited by A.M. Lee. New York: 
Barnes and Noble. 
LeBon, Gustave. 1960 [1895]. The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind. New York: Viking Press. 
Lofland, John. 1993. “Collective Behavior: The Elementary Forms.” Pp. 70–75 in Collective Behavior and Social 
Movements, edited by Russel Curtis and Benigno Aguirre. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 
McPhail, Clark. 1991. The Myth of the Madding Crowd. New York: Aldine de Gruyter. 
Smelser, Neil J. 1963. Theory of Collective Behavior. New York: Free Press. 
Turner, Ralph, and Lewis M. Killian. 1993. Collective Behavior. 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs, N. J., Prentice Hall. 
12.2   Social Movements 
A&E Television Networks, LLC. 2014. "Civil Rights Movement." Retrieved December 17, 2014 
(http://www.history.com/topics/black-history/civil-rights-movement). 
Aberle, David. 1966. The Peyote Religion among the Navaho. Chicago: Aldine. 
AP/The Huffington Post. 2014. "Obama: DOMA Unconstitutional, DOJ Should Stop Defending in Court." The Huffington 
Post. Retrieved December 17, 2014. (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/02/23/obama-doma-
unconstitutional_n_827134.html). 
Associated Press. 2021. "Arkansas governor signs bill allowing denial of medical services based on 'conscience'" The 
Associated Press. March 26, 2021. (https://www.thv11.com/article/news/politics/arkansas-governor-bill-
allowing-denial-medical-services-conscience/91-f4321c47-f6b1-4325-a18a-13a89ba98c7c) 
Area Chicago. 2011. “About Area Chicago.” Retrieved December 28, 2011 (http://www.areachicago.org). 
Benford, Robert, and David Snow. 2000. “Framing Processes and Social Movements: An Overview and Assessment.” 
Annual Review of Sociology 26:611–639. 
Blumer, Herbert. 1969. “Collective Behavior.” Pp. 67–121 in Principles of Sociology, edited by A.M. Lee. New York: 
Barnes and Noble. 
Buechler, Steven. 2000. Social Movement in Advanced Capitalism: The Political Economy and Social Construction of 
Social Activism. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Brown, Eileen. 2011. "Strong and Weak Ties: Why Your Weak Ties Matter." Social Media Today. June 30 2011. 
(https://www.socialmediatoday.com/content/strong-and-weak-ties-why-your-weak-ties-matter) 
CNN U.S. 2014. "Same-Sex Marriage in the United States." Retrieved December 17, 2014 
(http://www.cnn.com/interactive/us/map-same-sex-marriage/). 
CBS Interactive Inc. 2014. "Anonymous' Most Memorable Hacks." Retrieved December 17, 2014 
(http://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/anonymous-most-memorable-hacks/9/). 
Department of Justice, Office of Public Affairs. 2011. "Letter from the Attorney General to Congress on Litigation 
Involving the Defense of Marriage Act." Retrieved December 17, 2014 (http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/letter-
attorney-general-congress-litigation-involving-defense-marriage-act). 
De Alba, Simone. 2021. "Representative who filed Texit bill clears up what he means." News 4 San Antonio. February 2 
2021. (https://news4sanantonio.com/news/local/representative-who-filed-texit-bill-clears-up-what-it-means) 

 
 
Gladwell, Malcolm. 2010. “Small Change: Why the Revolution Will Not Be Tweeted.” The New Yorker, October 4. 
Retrieved December 23, 2011 
(http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/10/04/101004fa_fact_gladwell?currentPage=all). 
Goffman, Erving. 1974. Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Human Rights Campaign. 2011. Retrieved December 28, 2011 (http://www.hrc.org). 
Knowledge at Wharton. 2020. "How Social Media Is Shaping Political Campaigns." Knowledge@Wharton. August 17 
2020. (https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/how-social-media-is-shaping-political-campaigns/) 
McAdam, Doug, and Ronnelle Paulsen. 1993. “Specifying the Relationship between Social Ties and Activism.” American 
Journal of Sociology 99:640–667. 
McCarthy, John D., and Mayer N. Zald. 1977. “Resource Mobilization and Social Movements: A Partial Theory.” American 
Journal of Sociology 82:1212–1241. 
National Organization for Marriage. 2014. “About NOM.” Retrieved January 28, 2012 
(http://www.nationformarriage.org). 
Nonprofit Source. 2020. "Social Media Giving Statistics for Nonprofits." Retrieved April 1, 2021. 
(https://nonprofitssource.com/online-giving-statistics/social-media/) 
Sauter, Theresa, and Gavin Kendall. 2011. "Parrhesia and Democracy: Truthtelling, WikiLeaks and the Arab Spring." 
Social Alternatives 30, no.3: 10–14. 
Schmitz, Paul. 2014. "How Change Happens: The Real Story of Mrs. Rosa Parks & the Montgomery Bus Boycott." 
Huffington Post. Retrieved December 17, 2014 (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/paul-schmitz/how-change-
happens-the-re_b_6237544.html). 
Slow Food. 2011. “Slow Food International: Good, Clean, and Fair Food.” Retrieved December 28, 2011 
(http://www.slowfood.com). 
Snow, David, E. Burke Rochford, Jr., Steven , and Robert Benford. 1986. “Frame Alignment Processes, 
Micromobilization, and Movement Participation.” American Sociological Review 51:464–481. 
Snow, David A., and Robert D. Benford 1988. “Ideology, Frame Resonance, and Participant Mobilization.” International 
Social Movement Research 1:197–217. 
Technopedia. 2014. "Anonymous." Retrieved December 17, 2014 
(http://www.techopedia.com/definition/27213/anonymous-hacking). 
Texas Secede! 2009. “Texas Secession Facts.” Retrieved December 28, 2011 (http://www.texassecede.com). 
Tilly, Charles. 1978. From Mobilization to Revolution. New York: Mcgraw-Hill College. 
Wagenseil, Paul. 2011. "Anonymous 'hacktivists' attack Egyptian websites." NBC News. Retrieved December 17, 2014 
(http://www.nbcnews.com/id/41280813/ns/technology_and_science-security/t/anonymous-hacktivists-attack-
egyptian-websites/#.VJHmuivF-Sq). 
Walsh, Colleen. 2020. "MeToo Founder Discusses Where We Go From Here." The Harvard Gazette. February 21 2020. 
(https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2020/02/me-too-founder-tarana-burke-discusses-where-we-go-from-
here/) 
12.3   Social Change 
350.org. 2014. "350.org." Retrieved December 18, 2014 (http://350.org/). 

 
 
ABC News. 2007. "Parents: Cyber Bullying Led to Teen's Suicide." Retrieved December 18, 2014 
(http://abcnews.go.com/GMA/story?id=3882520). 
CBS News. 2011. “Record Year for Billion Dollar Disasters.” CBS News, Dec 11. Retrieved December 26, 2011 
(http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-201_162-57339130/record-year-for-billion-dollar-disasters). 
Center for Biological Diversity. 2014. "The Extinction Crisis. Retrieved December 18, 2014 
(http://www.biologicaldiversity.org/programs/biodiversity/elements_of_biodiversity/extinction_crisis/). 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). n.d. "Technology and Youth: Protecting your Children from Electronic 
Aggression: Tip Sheet." Retrieved December 18, 2014 (http://www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/ea-tipsheet-
a.pdf). 
Freidman, Thomas. 2005. The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the 21st Century. New York, NY: Farrar, Strauss, and 
Giroux. 
Irwin, Patrick. 1975. “An Operational Definition of Societal Modernization.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 
23:595–613. 
Klein, Naomi. 2008. The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. New York: Picador. 
Kolbert, Elizabeth. 2014. The Sixth Extinction. New York: Henry Holt and Co. 
Mahase, Elisabeth. 2019. "Cancer overtakes CVD to become leading cause of death in high income countries" The BMJ. 
September 3 2019. (https://www.bmj.com/content/366/bmj.l5368) 
Miller, Laura. 2010. “Fresh Hell: What’s Behind the Boom in Dystopian Fiction for Young Readers?” The New Yorker, June 
14. Retrieved December 26, 2011 
(http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/atlarge/2010/06/14/100614crat_atlarge_miller). 
Mullins, Dexter. 2014. "New Orleans to Be Home to Nation's First All-Charter School District." Al Jazeera America. 
Retrieved December 18, 2014 (http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/2014/4/4/new-orleans-
charterschoolseducationreformracesegregation.html). 
Robers, Simone, Jana Kemp, Jennifer, Truman, and Thomas D. Snyder. 2013. Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 
2012. National Center for Education Statistics, U.S. Department of Education, and Bureau of Justice Statistics, 
Office of Justice Programs, U.S. Department of Justice: Washington, DC. Retrieved December 17, 2014 
(http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2013/2013036.pdf). 
Sullivan, Melissa. 2005. "How New Orleans' Evacuation Plan Fell Apart." NPR. Retrieved December 18, 2014 
(http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=4860776). 
Wikia. 2014. "List of Environmental Organizations." Retrieved December 18, 2014 
(http://green.wikia.com/wiki/List_of_Environmental_organizations).